=== chunk: bohm-1996-on-dialogue/ch2-on-dialogue ===
title: On Dialogue
source_pdf: docs/sources/bohm-1996-on-dialogue/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 26-67
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 6
plan_page_end: 47
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 6 ===

The way we start a dialogue group is usually by talking about
dialogue — talking it over, discussing why we’re doing it, what
it means, and so forth. I don’t think it is wise to start a group
before people have gone into all that, at least somewhat. You
can, but then you'll have to trust that the group will continue,
and that these questions will come out later. So if you are
thinking of meeting in a group, one thing which I suggest is to
have a discussion or a seminar about dialogue for a while, and
those who are interested can then go on to have the dialogue.
And you mustn’t worry too much whether you are or are not
having dialogue — that’s one of the blocks. It may be mixed. So
we will discuss dialogue for a while — what is its nature?
   I give a meaning to the word “dialogue” that is somewhat
different from what is commonly used. The derivations of words
often help to suggest a deeper meaning. “Dialogue” comes from
the Greek word dialogos. Logos means “the word,” or in our case
we would think of the “meaning of the word.” And dia means
“through” — it doesn’t mean “two.” A dialogue can be among
any number of people, not just two. Even one person can have
a sense of dialogue within himself, if the spirit of the dialogue
is present. The picture or image that this derivation suggests is
of a stream of meaning flowing among and through us and
between us. This will make possible a flow of meaning in the
whole group, out of which may emerge some new understanding. It’s something new, which may not have been in the starting
point at all. It’s something creative. And this shared meaning is
the “glue” or “cement” that holds people and societies together.
   Contrast this with the word “discussion,” which has the same
root as “percussion” and “concussion.” It really means to break

=== p. 7 ===

                                 é@
things up. It emphasizes the idea of analysis, where there may
be many points of view, and where everybody is presenting a
different one — analyzing and breaking up. That obviously has
its value, but it is limited, and it will not get us very far beyond
our various points of view. Discussion is almost like a ping-pong game, where people are batting the ideas back and forth
and the object of the game is to win or to get points for yourself.
Possibly you will take up somebody else’s ideas to back up
your own — you may agree with some and disagree with others
— but the basic point is to win the game. That’s very frequently
the case in a discussion.
   In a dialogue, however, nobody is trying to win. Everybody
wins if anybody wins. There is a different sort of spirit to it. In
a dialogue, there is no attempt to gain points, or to make your
particular view prevail. Rather, whenever any mistake is discovered on the part of anybody, everybody gains. It’s a situation
called win-win, whereas the other game is win-lose — if I win,
you lose. But a dialogue is something more of a common participation, in which we are not playing a game against each other,
but with each other. In a dialogue, everybody wins.
   Clearly, a lot of what is called “dialogue” is not dialogue in
the way that I am using the word. For example, people at the
United Nations have been having what are often considered to
be dialogues, but these are very limited. They are more like
discussions — or perhaps trade-offs or negotiations — than dialogues. The people who take part are not really open to questioning their fundamental assumptions. They are trading off
minor points, like negotiating whether we have more or fewer
nuclear weapons. But the whole question of two different systems is not being seriously discussed. It’s taken for granted that
you can’t talk about that —- that nothing will ever change
that. Consequently their discussions are not serious, not deeply
serious. A great deal of what we call “discussion” is not
deeply serious, in the sense that there are all sorts of things
which are held to be non-negotiable and not touchable, and
people don’t even want to talk about them. That is part of our
trouble.
   Now, why do we need dialogue? People have difficulty communicating even in small groups. But in a group of thirty or
forty or more, many may find it very hard to communicate
unless there is a set purpose, or unless somebody is leading it.

=== p. 8 ===

Why is that? For one thing, everybody has different assumptions —
and opinions. They are basic'assumptions — not merely superficial assumptions — such as assumptions about the meaning of
life; about your own self-interest, your country’s interest, or
your religious interest;.about what you really think is important.
   And these assumptions are defended when they are chal- —
lenged. People frequently can’t resist defending them, and they
tend to defend them with an emotional charge. We'll discuss
that in more detail later, but Ill give an example now. We
organized a dialogue in Israel a number of years ago. At one
stage the people were discussing politics, and somebody said,
just in passing, “Zionism is creating a great difficulty in good
relations between Jews and Arabs. It is the principal barrier
that’s in the way.” He said it very quietly. Then suddenly somebody else couldn’t contain himself and jumped up. He was full
of emotion. His blood pressure was high and his eyes were
popping out. He said, “Without Zionism the country would fall
to pieces!”
   That fellow had one basic assumption, and the other person
had another one. And those two assumptions were really in
conflict. Then the question is, “What can you do?” You see,
those are the kinds of assumptions that are causing all the
trouble politically, all over the world. And the case I just
described is relatively easier than some of the assumptions that
we have to handle in politics. The point is that we have all sorts
of assumptions, not only about politics or economics or religion,
but also about what we think an individual should do, or what
life is all about, and so forth.
   We could also call these assumptions “opinions.” An opinion
is an assumption. The word “opinion” is used in several senses.
When a doctor has an opinion, that’s the best assumption that
he can make based on the evidence. He may then say, “Okay,
I’m not quite sure, so let’s get a second opinion.” In that case,
if he is a good doctor he does not react to defend his assumption.
If the second   opinion turns out to be different from his, he
doesn’t jump up with an emotional charge, such as the fellow
did on the question of Zionism, and say, “How can you say
such things?” That doctor’s opinion would be an example of a
rational sort of opinion. But most are not of that nature — mostly
they are defended   with a strong reaction. In other words, a

=== p. 9 ===

person identifies himself with them. They are tied up with his
investment in self-interest.
   The point is that dialogue has to go into all the pressures that
are behind our assumptions. It goes into the process of thought
behind the assumptions, not just the assumptions themselves.

                DIALOGUE       AND THOUGHT
It is important to see that the different opinions that you have
are the result of past thought: all your experiences, what other
people have said, and what not. That is all programmed into
your memory. You may then identify with those opinions and
react to defend them. But it doesn’t make sense to do this. If
the opinion is right, it doesn’t need such a reaction. And if it is
wrong, why should you defend it? If you are identified with it,
however, you do defend it. It is as if you yourself are under
attack when your opinion is challenged. Opinions thus tend to
be experienced as “truths,” even though they may only be your
own assumptions and your own background. You got them
from your teacher, your family, or by reading, or in yet some
other way. Then for one reason or another you are identified
with them, and you defend them.
   Dialogue is really aimed at going into the whole thought
process and changing the way the thought process occurs collectively. We haven’t really paid much attention to thought as a
process. We have engaged in thoughts, but we have only paid
attention to the content, not to the process. Why does thought
require attention? Everything requires attention, really. If we ran
machines without paying attention to them, they would break
down. Our thought, too, is a process, and it requires attention,
otherwise it’s going to go wrong.
   I'll try to give some examples of the difficulty in thinking, in
thought. One of these difficulties is fragmentation, which originates in thought — it is thought which divides everything up.
Every division we make is a result of how we think. In actuality,
the whole world is shades merging into one. But we select
certain things and separate them from others — for convenience,
at first. Later we give this separation great importance. We set
up separate nations, which is entirely the result of our thinking,
and then we begin to give them supreme importance. We also
divide religions by thought - separate religions are entirely a

=== p. 10 ===

result of how we think. And in the family, the divisions are in
thought. The whole way the family is set up is due to the way
we think about it.
   Fragmentation is one of the difficulties of thought, but there
is a deeper root, which is that thought is very active, but the
process of thought thinks that it is doing nothing — that it is -
just telling you the way things are. Almost everything around
us has been determined by thought — all the buildings, factories,
farms, roads, schools,   nations,    science, technology,   religion —
whatever you care to mention. The whole ecological problem is
due to thought, because we have thought that the world is there
for us to exploit, that it is infinite, and so no matter what we
did, the pollution would all get dissolved away.
  When we see a “problem,” whether pollution, carbon dioxide,
or whatever, we then say, “We have got to solve that problem.”
But we are constantly producing that sort of problem — not just
that particular problem, but that sort of problem — by the way
we go on with our thought. If we keep on thinking that the
world is there solely for our convenience, then we are going to
exploit it in some other way, and we are going to make another
problem somewhere. We may clear up the pollution, but may
then create some other difficulty, such as economic chaos, if we
don’t do it right. We might set up genetic engineering, but if
ordinary technology can produce such vast difficulties, imagine
the kind of thing genetic engineering could get us into — if we
go on with the same way of thinking. People will be doing
genetic engineering for whatever suits their fancy and the way
they think.
   The point is: thought produces results, but thought says it
didn’t do it. And that is a problem. The trouble is that some of
those results that thought produces are considered to be very
important and valuable. Thought produced the nation, and it
says that the nation has an extremely high value, a supreme
value, which overrides almost everything else. The same may
be said about religion. Therefore, freedom of thought is interfered with, because if the nation has high value it is necessary
to continue to think that the nation has high value. Therefore
you've got to create a pressure to think that way. You’ve got to
have an impulse, and make sure everybody has got the impulse,
to go on thinking that way about his nation, his religion, his

=== p. 11 ===

family, or whatever it is that he gives high value. He’s got to
defend it.
   You cannot defend something without first thinking the defense.
There are those thoughts which might question the thing you
want to defend, and you've got to push them aside. That may
readily involve self-deception - you will simply push aside a
lot of things you would rather not accept by saying they are
wrong, by distorting the issue, and so on. Thought defends its
basic assumptions against evidence that they may be wrong.
   In order to deal with this, we have got to look at thought,
because the problem is originating in thought. Usually when
you have a problem, you say, “I must think about it to solve
it.” But what I’m trying to say is that thought is the problem.
What, therefore, are we going to do? We could consider two
kinds of thought — individual and collective. Individually I can
think of various things, but a great deal of thought is what
we do together. In fact, most of it comes from the collective
background. Language is collective. Most of our basic assumptions come from our society, including all our assumptions about
how society works, about what sort of person we are supposed
to be, and about relationships, institutions, and so on. Therefore
we need to pay attention to thought both individually and
collectively.     e:
   In a dialogue, people coming from different backgrounds typically have different basic assumptions and opinions. In almost
any group you will probably find a great many different
assumptions and opinions of which we are not aware at the
moment. It is a matter of culture. In the overall culture there
are vast numbers of opinions and assumptions which help make
up that culture. And there are also sub-cultures that are somewhat different from one another according to ethnic groups, or
to economic situations, or to race, religion, or thousands of other
things. People will come to such a gathering from somewhat
different cultures or sub-cultures, with different assumptions
and opinions. And they may not realize it, but they have some
tendency to defend their assumptions and opinions reactively
against evidence that they are not right, or simply a similar
tendency to defend them against somebody who has another
opinion.
  If we defend opinions in this way, we are not going to be
able to have a dialogue. And we are often unconsciously defend-

=== p. 12 ===

                          ON: DIALOGUE

ing our opinions. We don’t usually do it on purpose. At times
we may be conscious that we are defending them, but mostly we
are not. We just feel that something is so true that we can’t
avoid trying to convince this stupid person how wrong he is to
disagree with us.
  Now,   that seems   the most   natural   thing in the world    — it
seems that that’s inevitable. Yet if you think of it, we can’t really
organize a good society if we go on that basis. That’s the way
democracy is supposed to work, but it hasn’t. If everybody has
a different opinion, it will be merely a struggle of opinions. And
the one who is the strongest will win. It may not necessarily
be the right one; it may be that none of them are right. Therefore,
we won't be doing the right thing when we try to get together.
   This problem arises whenever people meet for dialogue, or
legislators try to get together, or businessmen try to get together,
or whatever. If we all had to do a job together, we would likely
find that each one of us would have different opinions and
assumptions, and thus we would find it hard to do the job. The
temperature could go way up. In fact, there are people facing
this problem in large corporations. The top executives may all
have different opinions, hence they can’t get together. So the
company doesn’t work efficiently, it starts to lose money and
goes under.
   There are some people who are trying to form groups where
top business executives can talk together. If politicians would
do that, it would be very good. Religious people would be the
hardest to get together. The assumptions of the different
religions are so firmly embedded that I don’t know of any case
of two religions, or even sub-groups of any given religion, where
they ever got together once they had split. The Christian church,
for instance, has been talking about trying to get together for
ages and it stays about the same all the time. They talk and
they appear to get a little bit closer, and then it never happens.
They talk about unity and oneness and love, and all that, but
the other assumptions are more powerful; they are programmed
into us. Some religious people are trying to get together; they
are really sincere — they are as serious as they can be — but it
seems that they cannot do it.
   Scientists also get into the same situation. Each one may hold
to a different view of the truth, so they can’t get together. Or
they may have different self-interests. A scientist who is working
                                 i

=== p. 13 ===

for a company that produces pollution may have a certain self-interest in proving that the pollution is not dangerous. And
somebody else might have self-interest in proving that it is
dangerous. And perhaps then somewhere there is an unbiased
scientist who tries to judge it all.
   Science is supposed to be dedicated to truth and fact, and
religion is supposed to be dedicated to another kind of truth,
and to love. But people’s self-interest and assumptions take
over. Now, we're not trying to judge these people. Something
is happening, which is that assumptions or opinions are like
computer programs in people’s minds. Those programs take
over against the best of intentions — they produce their own
intentions.
   We could say, then, that a group of about twenty to forty
people is almost a microcosm of the whole society — like the
groups we have just looked at, it has a lot of different opinions
and assumptions. It is possible to have a dialogue with one
person or with two, three, or four, or you can have the attitude
of the dialogue by yourself, as you weigh all the opinions without deciding. But a group that is too small doesn’t work very
well. If five or six people get together, they can usually adjust
to each other so that they don’t say the things that upset each
other — they get a “cozy adjustment.” People can easily be very
polite to each other and avoid the issues that may cause trouble.
And if there is a confrontation between two or more people in
such a small group, it seems very hard to stop it; it gets stuck.
In a larger group, we may well start out politely. After a while,
though, people can seldom continue to avoid all the issues that
would be troublesome. The politeness falls away pretty soon.
In a group of less than about twenty it may not, because people
get to know each other and know the rough edges that they
have to avoid. They can take it all into account; it’s not too
much. But in a group of forty or fifty it is too much.
   So when you raise the number to about twenty, something
different begins to happen. And forty people is about as many
as you can conveniently arrange in a circle — or you might put
two circles concentrically. In that size group, you begin to get
what may be called a “microculture.” You have enough people
coming in from different sub-cultures so that they are a sort
of microcosm of the whole culture. And then the question of
culture — the collectively shared meaning — begins to come in.

=== p. 14 ===

That is crucial, because the collectively shared meaning is very
powerful. The collective thought is more powerful than the
individual thought. As we said, the individual thought is mostly
the result of collective thought and of interaction with other
people. The language is entirely collective, and most of the
thoughts in it. are. Everybody does his own thing to those
thoughts — he makes a contribution. But very few change them
very much.
   The power of the group goes up much faster than the number
of people. I’ve said elsewhere that it could be compared to a
laser. Ordinary light is called “incoherent,” which means that it
is going in all sorts of directions, and the light waves are not
in phase with each other so they don’t build up. But a laser
produces a very intense beam which is coherent. The light waves
build up strength because they are all going in the same direction. This beam can do all sorts of things that ordinary light
cannot.
  Now, you could say that our ordinary thought in society is
incoherent — it is going in all sorts of directions, with thoughts
conflicting and canceling each other out. But if people were to
think together in a coherent way, it would have tremendous
power. That’s the suggestion. If we have a dialogue situation —
a group which has sustained dialogue for quite a while in which
people get to know each other, and so on — then we might have
such a coherent movement of thought, a coherent movement             of
communication. It would be coherent not only at the level we
recognize, but at the tacit level, at the level for which we have
only a vague feeling. That would be more important.
  “Tacit”   means   that   which   is unspoken,   which    cannot   be
described — like the knowledge required to ride a bicycle. It is
the actual knowledge,      and   it may   be coherent   or not.   I am
proposing that thought is actually a subtle tacit process. The
concrete process of thinking is very tacit. The meaning is basically tacit. And what we can say explicitly is only a very small
part of it. I think we all realize that we do almost everything
by this sort of tacit knowledge. Thought is emerging from the
tacit ground, and any fundamental change in thought will come
from the tacit ground. So if we are communicating at the tacit
level, then maybe thought is changing:
   The tacit process is common. It is shared. The sharing is not
merely the explicit communication and the body language and

=== p. 15 ===

all that, which are part of if, but there is also a deeper tacit
process which is common. I think the whole human race knew
this for a million years; and then in five thousand years of
civilization we have lost it, because our societies got too big to
carry it out. But now we have to get started again, because it
has become urgent that we communicate. We have to share our
consciousness   and to be able to think together, in order to do
intelligently whatever is necessary. If we begin to confront
what's going on in a dialogue group, we sort of have the nucleus
of what's going on in all society. When you are by yourself you
miss quite a bit of that; even one-on-one you don’t really get it.

                 ENGAGING       IN DIALOGUE
A basic notion for a dialogue would be for people to sit in a
circle. Such a geometric arrangement doesn’t favor anybody; it
allows for direct communication. In principle, the dialogue
should work without any leader and without any agenda. Of
course, we are used to leaders and agendas, so if we were to
start a meeting without a leader - start talking and have no
agenda, no purpose — I think we would find a great deal of
anxiety in not knowing what to do. Thus, one of the things
would be to work through that anxiety, to face it. In fact, we
know by experience that if people do this for an hour or two
they do get through it and start to talk more freely.
  It may be useful to have a facilitator to get the group going,
who keeps a watch on it for a while and sort of explains what’s
happening from time to time, and that kind of thing. But his
function is to work himself out of a job. Now, that may take
time. It may be that people must meet regularly and sustain the
dialogue. That form might be to meet week after week, or biweekly or whatever, and sustain it a long time — a year or two
or more. In that period, all those things we mentioned would
come out. And people would begin to learn really to depend
less and less on the facilitator— at least that’s the idea behind
it. Now, the whole of society has been organized to believe that
we can’t function without leaders. But maybe we can. That’s
the suggestion. Of course, it’s an experiment. We can’t guarantee
that it is going to happen. But that is what takes place in any
new venture — you consider all the evidence, you consider

=== p. 16 ===

what's the best idea, whatto say about it, what your theories
about it are, and then you go ahead and try it.
  At the beginning of a dialogue we would not expect that
personal problems or questions would enter into it. If people
sustained the dialogue week after week, or month after month,
then maybe they could. Everything can enter, but the people
have to get to know each other and trust each other and establish that relationship of sharing. It would be too much to expect
to start with that. And in fact, a personal problem may not be
all that important anyway; although if someone has one, the
group could consider it. There is no reason why they couldn't;
however, I don’t think we would begin with that, at least not
often. The group is not mainly for the sake of personal problems; it’s
mainly a cultural question. But the personal could come into the
group, because personal problems and culture get mixed up.
   It is important to understand that a dialogue group is not a
therapy group of some kind. We are not trying to cure anybody
here, though it may happen as a byproduct. But that’s not our
purpose. Dr Patrick de Mare, a friend of mine who has gone
into this, calls it “socio-therapy,” not individual therapy. The
group is a microcosm of society, so if the group — or anyone —
is “cured,” it is the beginning of the larger cure. You can look
at it that way if you like. That’s limited, but still it’s a way to
look at it. Nor is this a so-called “encounter group,” which is
aimed at a particular type of therapy where people’s emotions,
and so forth, can come up. We are not particularly aiming for
that, but we are not saying that emotions should never come
up, because in certain cases, if people confront each emotionally
it will bring out their assumptions. In the dialogue people
should talk directly to one another, one to one, across the circle.
Then the time would come, if we got to know each other a bit
and could trust each other, when you could speak very directly
to the whole group, or to anybody in it.
   Some time ago there was an anthropologist who lived for a
long while with a North American tribe. It was a small group
of about this size. The hunter-gatherers have typically lived in
groups of twenty to forty. Agricultural group units are much
larger. Now, from time to time that tribe met like this in a circle.
They just talked and talked and talked, apparently to no purpose. They made no decisions. There was no leader. And everybody could participate. There may have been wise men or wise

=== p. 17 ===

women who were listened to a bit more — the older ones — but
everybody could talk. The meeting went on, until it finally
seemed to stop for no reason at all and the group dispersed.
Yet after that, everybody seemed to know what to do, because
they understood each other so well. Then they could get
together in smaller groups and do something or decide things.
   In the dialogue group we are not going to decide what to do
about anything. This is crucial: Otherwise we are not free. We
must have an empty space where we are not obliged to do
anything, nor to come to any conclusions, nor to say anything
or not say anything. It’s open and free. It’s an empty space. The
word “leisure” has that meaning of a kind of empty space.
“Occupied” is the opposite of leisure; it’s full. So we have here
a kind of empty space where anything may come in — and after
we finish, we just empty it. We are not trying to accumulate
anything. That’s one of the points about a dialogue. As Krishna-murti used to say, “The cup has to be empty to hold something.”
   We see that it is not an arbitrary imposition to state that we
have no fixed purpose — no absolute purpose, anyway. We may
set up relative purposes for investigation, but we are not
wedded to a particular purpose, and are not saying that the
whole group must conform to that purpose indefinitely. All of
us might want the human race to survive, but even that is not
our purpose. Our purpose is really to communicate coherently
in truth, if you want to call that a purpose.
   You could say that generally our culture goes in for large
groups of people for two reasons. One is for entertainment and
fun. The other is to get a useful job done. Now, I’m going to
propose that in a dialogue we are not going to have any agenda,
we are not going to try to accomplish any useful thing. As soon
as we try to accomplish a useful purpose or goal, we will have
an assumption behind it as to what is useful, and that assumption is going to limit us. Different people will think different
things are useful. And that’s going to cause trouble. We may
say, “Do we want to save the world?” or “Do we want to run
a school?” or “Do we want to make money?” Whatever it may
be. That’s also going to be one of the problems in corporate
dialogues. Will they ever give up the notion that they are there
primarily to make a profit? If they could, this would be a real
transformation of mankind. I think that many business executives in certain companies are feeling unhappy and really want

=== p. 18 ===

to do something— iit merely to save the company. Just as we
are, they are unhappy about the whole world. It’s not that all
of them are money-grubbing or exclusively profit-oriented.
   When a dialogue group is new, in general people talk around
the point for a while. In all human relations nowadays, people
generally have.a way of not directly facing anything. They
talk around things, avoiding the difficulties. This practice will
probably continue within a dialogue group. If you keep the
group going for a while though, that tendency begins to break
down. At a dialogue one evening a fellow spoke up, saying,
“Okay, we're all talking about philosophy. Can I read this nice
bit of philosophy I brought?” And some people said, “No.” So
he didn’t read it. It seemed a bit of a shock, but it worked out.
   It all has to be worked out. People will come to a group with
different interests and assumptions. In the beginning they may
have negotiation, which is a very preliminary stage of dialogue.
In other words, if people have different approaches, they have
to negotiate somehow. However, that is not the end of dialogue;
it is the beginning. Negotiation involves finding a common way
of proceeding. Now, if you only negotiate, you don’t get very
far — although some questions do have to be negotiated.
   A great deal of what nowadays is typically considered to be
dialogue tends to focus on negotiation; but as we said, that is
a preliminary stage. People are generally not ready to go into
the deeper issues when they first have what they consider to
be a dialogue. They negotiate, and that’s about as far as they
get. Negotiation is trading off, adjusting to each other and
saying, “Okay, I see your point. I see that that is important to
you. Let’s find a way that would satisfy both of us. I will give
in a little on this, and you give in a little on that. And then
we will work something out.” Now, that’s not really a close
relationship, but it begins to make it possible to get going.
   So the suggestion is that people could start dialogue groups
in various places. The point would not be to identify with the
group, but rather, what is important is this whole process. You
might say, “This is a wonderful group,” but it’s actually the
process that counts.
   I think that when we are able to sustain a dialogue of this
sort you will find that there will be a change in the people who
are taking part. They themselves would then behave differently,
even outside the dialogue. Eventually they would spread it. It’s

=== p. 19 ===

like the Biblical analogy of the seeds - some are dropped in
stony ground and some of them fall in the right place and they
produce tremendous fruit. The thing is that you cannot tell
where or how it can start. The idea here, the communication
here, the kind of thought we’re having here, is a kind of seed
which may help this to come about. But we mustn’t be surprised
if many of these groups are abortive and don’t get going. That
doesn’t mean it can’t happen.
   The point is not to establish a fixed dialogue group forever,
but rather one that lasts long enough to make a change. If you
keep holding it for too long it may become caught up in habits
again. But you have to keep it up for a while, or else it won’t
work. It may be valuable to keep the dialogue going for a year
or two, as we said, and it is important to sustain it regularly. If
you sustain it, all these problems will arise; it cannot avoid
bringing out the deep assumptions of the people who are participating. The frustration will arise, the sense of chaos, the sense
that it’s not worth it. The emotional charge will come. The
fellow with the assumptions about Zionism probably wanted to
be very polite. But suddenly somebody said something that
outraged him, and he couldn’t control himself. It’s going to
happen that the deep assumptions will come to the surface, if
we stick with it. But if you understand that you do nevertheless
have to stick with it, then something new will come.
   Now, dialogue is not going to be always entertaining, nor is
it doing anything visibly useful. So you may tend to drop it as
soon as it gets difficult. But I suggest that it is very important
to go on with it — to stay with it through the frustration. When
you think something is important you will do that. For example,
nobody would climb Mount Everest unless for some reason he
thought it was important, as that could also be very frustrating
and not always entertaining. And the same is true if you have
to make money, or do all sorts of things. If you feel that they
are necessary, you do them.
   I’m saying that it is necessary to share meaning. A society is
a link of relationships among people and institutions, so that
we can live together. But it only works if we have a culture —
which implies that we share meaning; i.e., significance, purpose,
and value. Otherwise it falls apart. Our society is incoherent, and
doesn’t do that very well; it hasn’t for a long time, if it ever

=== p. 20 ===

did. The different assumptiohs that people have are tacitly affecting the whole meaning of what we are doing.

              SUSPENDING        ASSUMPTIONS
We have been saying that people in any group will bring to it
their assumptions, and as the group continues meeting, those
assumptions will come up. Then what is called for is to suspend
those assumptions, so that you neither carry them out nor suppress them. You don’t believe them, nor do you disbelieve them;
you don’t judge them as good or bad. Normally when you are
angry you start to react outwardly, and you may just say something nasty. Now suppose I try to suspend that reaction. Not
only will I now not insult that person outwardly, but I will
suspend the insult that I make inside of me. Even if I don’t
insult somebody outwardly, I am insulting him inside. So I will
suspend that, too. I hold it back, I reflect it back. You may also
think of it as suspended in front of you so that you can look at
it — sort of reflected back as if you were in front of a mirror. In
this way I can see things that I wouldn’t have seen if I had
simply carried out that anger, or if I had suppressed it and said,
“Tm not angry” or “I shouldn’t be angry.”
   So the whole group now becomes a mirror for each person.
The effect you have on the other person is a mirror, and also
the effect the other person has on you. Seeing this whole process
is very helpful in bringing out what’s going on, because you
can see that everybody’s in the same boat.
   What’s required then is that we notice the connection between
the thoughts going on in the dialogue, the feelings in the body,
and the emotions. If you watch, you'll see from the body language, as well as from the verbal language, that everybody’s in
much the same boat — they’re just on opposite sides. The group
may even polarize so that two very powerful groups are against
each other. But one of the things we're aiming for is that this
should come out. We’re not trying to suppress it.
   Therefore, you simply see what the assumptions and reactions
mean — not only your own, but the other people’s as well. We
are not trying to change anybody’s opinion. When this meeting
is over, somebody may or may not change his opinion. This is
part of what I consider dialogue — for people to realize what
is on each other’s minds without coming to any conclusions or

=== p. 21 ===

judgments. Assumptions will come up. And if you hear somebody else who has an assumption that seems outrageous to you,
the natural response might be to get angry, or get excited, or to
react in some other way. But suppose you suspend that activity.
You may not even have known that you had an assumption. It
was only because he came up with the opposite one that you
find out that you have one. You may uncover other assumptions,
but we are all suspending them and looking at them all, seeing
what they mean.
   You have to notice your own reactions of hostility, or whatever, and you can see by the way people are behaving what their
reactions are. You may find, as with anger, that it could go so
far that the meeting could blow up. If temperatures do rise,
then those who are not completely caught up in their particular
opinions should come in to defuse the situation a bit so that
people could look at it. It mustn’t go so far that you can’t look
at it. The point is to keep it at a level where the opinions come
out, but where you can look at them. Then you may have to
see that the other person’s hostility provokes your own. That’s
all part of the observation, the suspension. You become more
familiar with how thought works.

               THE IMPULSE        OF NECESSITY
We've been discussing dialogue and thought, and the importance of giving attention to the whole process — not merely to
the content of all the different opinions and views — and to how
we hold it all together. Also we're all watching the process of
how it affects us, our feelings and states of the body, and how
other people are affected. This is really something of crucial
importance, to be listening and watching, observing, to give
attention to the actual process of thought and the order in which
it happens, and to watch for its incoherence, where it’s not
working properly, and so on. We are not trying to change anything,
but just being aware of it. And you can notice the similarity of the
difficulties within a group to the conflicts and incoherent thoughts
within an individual.
   I think that as we do this we will find that certain kinds of
thoughts play a greater role than other kinds. One of the kinds
that is most important is the thought of necessity. What is necessary cannot be otherwise; it’s just got to be that way. It is

=== p. 22 ===

interesting that the word necessary has a Latin root, necesse, meaning “don’t yield.” It really means “what cannot be turned aside.”
Ordinarily as we go through life, problems come up and they
can be turned aside, or if they can’t be turned aside then we
turn aside, and that is the way we resolve things. But then there
may arise a necessity, as I said, which cannot be turned aside;
but we may have our own necessity which also cannot be turned
aside. Then we feel frustrated. Each necessity is absolute, and
we have a conflict of absolute necessities. Typically, it may come
up that your own opinion cannot be turned aside, nor can the
other person’s, and you feel the other person’s opinion working
within you, opposing you. So each person is in a state of conflict.
   Necessity creates powerful impulses. Once you feel that something is necessary, it creates an impulse to do it or not to do it,
whatever it may be. It may be very strong and you feel compelled, propelled. Necessity is one of the most powerful forces
— it overrides all the instincts eventually. If people feel something
is necessary, they’ll even go against the instinct of self-preservation and all sorts of things. In the dialogue, both individually
and collectively - this is important — the conflicts come up
around this notion of necessity. All the serious arguments,
whether in the family or in the dialogue, are about different
views of what is absolutely necessary. Unless it takes that form,
then you can always negotiate it and decide what has first
priority, and adjust it. But if two things are absolutely necessary
you cannot use the usual way of negotiation. That is the weak
point about negotiation. When two different nations come up
and each one says, “I’m sovereign, and what I say has to go:
it’s absolutely necessary,” then there is no answer unless they
can change that.
   The question is what to do if there is a clash of two absolute
necessities. The first thing that happens is that we get this
emotional charge and we can build up powerful feelings of
anger, hate, frustration, as I described before. As long as that
absolute necessity remains, nothing can change it, because in a
way each person says that they have a valid reason to stick to
what they’ve got, and they have a valid reason to hate the other
person for getting in the way of what is absolutely necessary:
“He rather obstinately and stupidly refuses to see this,” and so
on. One may say that it’s regrettable that we have to kill all
these people, but it is absolutely necessary, in the interests of
                                 2?

=== p. 23 ===

                              é
the country, the religion, or whatever it may be. So you see the
power of that notion.
   So in the dialogue we are expecting the notions of absolute
necessity to come up, to clash with each other. People avoid
that, because they know that there’s going to be trouble and
they skirt those questions. But if we sustain the dialogue it’s
going to come up. The question is what happens then.
   We discussed previously that something can happen, if people
will stay with it, which will change their whole attitude. At a
certain moment we may have the insight that each one of us is
doing the same thing - sticking to the absolute necessity of his
idea — and that nothing can happen if we do that. If so, it may
raise the question “Is it absolutely necessary? So much is being
destroyed just because we have this notion of it being absolutely
necessary.” Now if you can question it and say, “Is it absolutely necessary?” then at some point it may loosen up. People
may say, “Well, maybe it’s not absolutely necessary.” Then the
whole thing becomes easier, and it becomes possible to let that
conflict go and to explore new notions of what is necessary,
creatively. The dialogue can then enter a creative new area. I
think this is crucial.
   What about these notions of necessity which we have to set
up or discover? If an artist just puts on his paint in arbitrary
places, you would say there wasn’t anything to it; if he just
follows somebody else’s order of necessity, he’s mediocre. He’s
got to create his own order of necessity. Different parts of the
form he is making must have an inner necessity or else the thing
has not really much of a value. This artistic necessity is creative.
The artist has his freedom in this creative act. Therefore, freedom
makes possible a creative perception of new orders of necessity. If
you can’t do that, you’re not really free. You may say you’re
doing whatever you like and that’s your impulse, but I think
we’ve seen that your impulses can come from your thoughts.
For example, the thought of what is necessary will make an
impulse, and people who are in international conflict will say
our impulse is to go to war and get rid of these people who
are in our way, as if that were freedom. But it isn’t. They’re
being driven by that thought. So doing what you like is seldom
freedom, because what you like is determined by what you
think and that is often a pattern which is fixed. Therefore we
have a creative necessity which we discover — you can discover

=== p. 24 ===

individually or we can: do so collectively in the group— of how
to operate in a group in a new way. Any group which has
problems really has got to solve them creatively if they’re
serious problems. It can’t just be by trade-offs and negotiations
of the old ways.
  I think this is one of the key points, then — to realize when
you come to an assumption, that there is an assumption of.
absolute necessity which you're getting into, and that’s why
everything is sticking.

            PROPRIOCEPTION          OF THOUGHT
You can see the whole scope of this question of dialogue giving
attention to thought may look rather elementary or simple in
the beginning, but it actually gets to the root of our Jspees
and opens the way to creative transformation.
   We come back to the realization that the thing which has gone
wrong with thought is basically, as I said before, that it does
things and then says or implies that it didn’t do them — that they
took place independently, and that they constitute “problems.”
Whereas what you really have to do is to stop thinking that
way so that you stop creating that problem. The “problem” is
insoluble as long as you keep on producing it all the time by
your thought. Thought has to be in some sense aware of its
consequences, and presently thought is not sufficiently aware
of its consequences. That ties up with something similar in
neurophysiology called proprioception, which really means “selfperception.” The body can perceive its own movement. When
you move the body you know the relation between intention
and action. The impulse to move and the movement are seen
to be connected. If you don’t have that, the body is not viable.
   We know of a woman who apparently had a stroke in the
middle of the night. She woke up and she was hitting herself.
People came in and turned on the light and that’s what they
found. What happened was that her motor nerves were
working, but her sensory nerves were no longer working. So
she probably touched herself, but she didn’t know that she’d
touched herself, and therefore she assumed that somebody else
was touching her and interpreted that as an attack. The more
she defended, the worse the attack got. The proprioception had
broken down. She no longer saw the relation between the inten-

=== p. 25 ===

tion to move and the result. When the light was turned on,
proprioception was established in a new way, by sight.
   The question is: can thought be proprioceptive? You have the
intention to think, which you’re not usually aware of. You think
because you have an intention to think. It comes from the idea
that it is necessary to think, that there’s a problem. If you watch,
you'll see an intention to think, an impulse to think. Then comes
the thought, and the thought miay give rise to a feeling, which
might give rise to another intention to think, and so on. You’re
not aware of that, so the thought appears as if it were coming
by itself, and the feeling appears to be coming by itself, and so
on. That gives the wrong meaning, as in the case of the woman
we talked about just now. You may get a feeling that you don’t
like from a thought, and then a second later say, “I’ve got to
get rid of that feeling,” but your thought is still there working,
especially if it’s a thought that you take to be absolutely
necessary.
   In fact, the problems we have been discussing are basically
all due to this lack of proprioception. The point of suspension is
to help make proprioception possible, to create a mirror so that you
can see the results of your thought. You have it inside yourself
because your body acts as a mirror and you can see tensions
arising in the body. Also other people are a mirror, the group
is a mirror. You have to see your intention. You get an impulse
to say something and you see it there, the result, at almost the
same time.
   If everybody is giving attention, then there will arise a new
kind of thought between people, or even in the individual,
which is proprioceptive, and which doesn’t get into the kind of
tangle that thought gets into ordinarily, which is not proprioceptive. We could say that practically all the problems of the human
race are due to the fact that thought is not proprioceptive.
Thought is constantly creating problems that way and then
trying to solve them. But as it tries to solve them it makes it
worse because it doesn’t notice that it’s creating them, and the
more it thinks, the more problems it creates — because it’s not
proprioceptive of what it’s doing. If your body were that way
you would very quickly come to grief and you wouldn’t last
very long. And it may be said that if our culture were that way,
our civilization would not last all that long, either. So this is

=== p. 26 ===

another way in which dialogué will help collectively to bring
about a different kind of consciousness.

               COLLECTIVE        PARTICIPATION
All of this is part. of collective thought — people thinking
together. At some stage we would share our opinions without
hostility, and we would then be able to think together; whereas
when we defend an opinion we can’t. An example of people
thinking together would be that somebody would get an idea,
somebody else would take it up, somebody else would add to
it. The thought would flow, rather than there being a lot of
different people, each trying to persuade or convince the others.
   In the beginning, people won’t trust each other. But I think
that if they see the importance of the dialogue, they will work
with it. And as they start to know each other, they begin to
trust each other. It may take time. At first you will just come
into the group bringing all the problems of the culture and the
society. Any group like this is a microcosm of society — it has
all sorts of opinions, people not trusting each other, and so on.
So you begin to work from there. People talk at first in a perhaps
rather trivial way, and then later less trivially. Initially they talk
about superficial issues, because they’re afraid of doing more,
and then gradually they learn to trust each other.
   The object of a dialogue is not to analyze things, or to win
an argument, or to exchange opinions. Rather, it is to suspend
your opinions and to look at the opinions — to listen to everybody’s opinions, to suspend them, and to see what all that
means. If we can see what all of our opinions mean, then we
are sharing a common content, even if we don’t agree entirely. It
may turn out that the opinions are not really very important —
they are all assumptions. And if we can see them all, we may
then move more creatively in a different direction. We can just
simply share the appreciation of the meanings; and out of this
whole thing, truth emerges unannounced — not that we have
chosen it.
  If each of us in this room is suspending, then we are all doing
the same thing. We are all looking at everything together. The
content of our consciousness is essentially the same. Accordingly, a different kind of consciousness is possible among us, a
participatory consciousness — as indeed consciousness always is,

=== p. 27 ===

but one that is frankly acknowledged to be participatory and
can go that way freely. Everything can move between us. Each
person is participating, is partaking of the whole meaning of
the group and also taking part in it. We can call that a true
dialogue.
   Something more important will happen if we can do this, if
we can manage it. Everybody will be sharing all the assumptions in the group. If everybody sees the meaning together, of
all the assumptions, then the content of consciousness is essentially the same. Whereas if we all have different assumptions
and defend them, each person is then going to have a different
content, because we won't really take in the other person’s
assumptions. We'll be fighting them, or pushing them away —
trying to convince or persuade the other person.
   Conviction and persuasion are not called for in a dialogue.
The word “convince” means to win, and the word “persuade”
is similar. It’s based on the same root as are “suave” and
“sweet.” People sometimes try to persuade by sweet talk or to
convince by strong talk. Both come to the same thing, though,
and neither of them is relevant. There’s no point in being per-suadedor convinced. That’s not really coherent or rational. If
something is right, you don’t need to be persuaded. If somebody
has to persuade you, then there is probably some doubt about it.
   If we could all share a common meaning, we would be participating together. We would be partaking of the common meaning
— just as people partake of food together. We would be taking
part and communicating and creating a common meaning. That
would be participation, which means both “to partake of” and
“to take part in.” It would mean that in this participation a
common    mind   would   arise,    which   nonetheless   would   not
exclude the individual. The individual might hold a separate
opinion, but that opinion would then be absorbed into the
group, too.
   Thus, everybody is quite free. It’s not like a mob where the
collective mind takes over — not at all. It is something between
the individual and the collective. It can move between them.
It’s a harmony of the individual and the collective, in which the
whole constantly moves toward coherence. So there is both a
collective mind and an individual mind, and like a stream, the
flow moves between them. The opinions, therefore, don’t matter
so much. Eventually we may be somewhere between all these

=== p. 28 ===

opinions, and we start to move‘beyond them in another direction — a tangential direction — into something new and creative.

                      A NEW CULTURE

A society is a link of relationships that are set by people in
order to work and live together: rules, laws, institutions, and
various things. It is done by thinking and agreeing that we are
going to have them, and then we do it. And behind that is a
culture, which is shared meaning. Even to say that we want to
set up a government, people must agree to a common meaning
of what kind of government they want, what’s good government, what's right, and so on. Different cultures will produce
different functions of government. And if some people don’t
agree, then we have political struggle. When it goes further, it
breaks down into civil war.
   I am saying society is based on shared meanings, which constitute the culture. If we don’t share coherent meaning, we do
not make much of a society. And at present, the society at large
has a very incoherent set of meanings. In fact, this set of “shared
meanings” is so incoherent that it is hard to say that they have
any real meaning at all. There is a certain amount of significance,
but it is very limited. The culture in general is incoherent. And
we will thus bring with us into the group — or microcosm or
microculture — a corresponding incoherence.
   If all the meanings can come in together, however, we may
be able to work toward coherence. As a result of this process,
we may naturally and easily drop a lot of our meanings. But
we don’t have to begin by accepting or rejecting them. The
important thing is that we will never come to truth unless the
overall meaning is coherent. All the meanings of the past and
the present are together. We first have to apprehend them,
and just let them be; and this will bring about a certain order.
   If we can work this through, we will then have a coherent
meaning in the group, and hence the beginning of a new kind
of culture — a culture of a kind which, as far as I can tell, has
never really existed. If it ever did, it must have been very
long ago — maybe in some groups in the primitive Stone Age
conditions. I am saying that a genuine culture could arise in
which opinions and assumptions are not defended incoherently.

=== p. 29 ===

And that kind of culture is necessary for the society to work,
and ultimately for the society to survive.
   Such a group might be the germ or the microcosm of the
larger culture, which would then spread in many ways -— not
only by creating new groups, but also by people communicating
the notion of what it means.
   Also, one can see that it is possible that this spirit of the
dialogue can work even in smaller groups, or one-on-one, or
within the individual. If the individual can hold all of the meanings together in his own mind, he has the attitude of the dialogue. He could carry that out and perhaps communicate it,
both verbally and non-verbally, to other people. In principle,
this could spread. Many people are interested in dialogue now.
We find it growing. The time seems to be ripe for this notion,
and it could perhaps spread in many different areas.
   I think that something like this is necessary for society to
function properly and for society to survive. Otherwise it will
all fall apart. This shared meaning is really the cement that holds
society together, and you could say that the present society has
some very poor-quality cement. If you make a building with
very low-quality cement, it cracks and falls apart. We really need
the right cement, the right glue. And that is shared meaning.

                DIFFICULTIES       IN DIALOGUE
We have talked about the positive side of dialogue. However,
this attempt at dialogue can be very frustrating. I say this not
only theoretically, but also from experience. We’ve mentioned
some of the difficulties: it’s frustrating to have all these opinions;
there may be anxiety. Besides that, you will find other problems
in trying to have a dialogue in a group of any size. Some people
want to assert themselves; that’s their way of going about things.
They talk easily and they become dominant. They may have an
image of themselves as dominant, and they get a certain amount
of security out of it, a lift out of it. Other people, however, do
not have such great self-esteem in this area; they tend to hold
back, especially when they see somebody who is dominant.
They are afraid that they'll make fools of themselves, or something of the kind.
   There are various roles that people adopt. Some people adopt
the dominant role, some adopt the role of the weak, powerless

=== p. 30 ===

person who can be dominated. They sort of work together, with
each other. Those “roles,” which are really based on assumptions
and opinions, will also interfere with the operation of dialogue.
So a person has built some assumptions about himself, whether
it’s one way or the other. Also, since his childhood people have
told him that that’s what he is, that he is this way or that way.
He has had bad experiénces or good experiences, and it all built
up. These are some of the problems which will arise when we
try to have a dialogue.
   A further difficulty is you find that very often there is an
impulse or pressure, a compulsion almost, to get in there quickly
and get your point of view across, particularly if you are one
of the “talkers.” Even if you’re not, you have that pressure, but
you're holding back because you’re frightened. Therefore, there
is no time for people to absorb what has been said, or to ponder
it. People feel under pressure to get in, and people feel left out.
The whole communication breaks down for this very elementary
reason. This is nothing deep at all, but still we have got to
address it. Very often when you don’t give space in a group,
everybody jumps in right away with whatever he has in his
mind. But at the same time, you shouldn’t be mulling it over
in your mind — picking on one point and turning it over — while
the conversation goes on to something else. If you stop to think
about one point, by the time you have thought about it the
group has moved on, and what you were going to say is now
irrelevant. As you were thinking, “What does all that mean and
what shall I say about it?” it became too late, because the topic
has changed. So there is sort of a subtle situation in between,
where you are not jumping in too fast, nor holding back too
much. There may be silent periods, and so on.
    So while we don’t have “rules” for the dialogue, we may
learn certain principles as we go along which help us — such as
that we must give space for each person to talk. We don’t put
this as a rule; rather we say that we can see the sense of it, and
we are learning to do it. So we see the necessity or value of
certain procedures that help.
    Also, if someone wants the group to accomplish his idea or
purpose, it would probably start a conflict. The dialogue is
aimed for those people who can commonly agree that this is the
way to go about it. If people don’t agree that this is the way to
go about it, then there is no reason to be in it. Frequently you
                                                          °

=== p. 31 ===

                                 é
find that as the dialogue goes on and the group continues, some
people leave and others come in. There are those who feel,
“Well, this is not for me.”
   Now, how are you going to deal with the frustrations within
the group? As we said before, things may make you angry or
frustrated or may frighten you. Your assumptions may be
revealed and challenged, and you may find the opinions of
others to be outrageous. Also, people may be frightened and
anxious if there is no leader and no topic and nothing “to do.”
So you have to get through all of that.
   These are the problems that are going to arise — that have
arisen in all the groups that I’ve seen. And you can expect that
they are almost inevitable, and may       ask, “Then   what   is the
point in going on with all of this?’ So we must explore that.

                THE VISION OF DIALOGUE
Let me give what I call a “vision of dialogue.” You don’t have
to accept it, but it may be a way to look at it. Let’s suppose we
stick with this, and we face the emotional charge -— all this
irritation, all this frustration — which actually can develop into
hate if very powerful assumptions are there. We could say
that hate is a neurophysiological, chemical disturbance of a very
powerful kind, which is now endemic in the world. Wherever
you look, you see people hating each other. So suppose you
stick with this. You may get an insight, a shared insight, that
we're all in the same position — everybody has an assumption,
everybody is sticking to his assumption, everybody is disturbed
neurochemically. The fundamental level in people is the same;
the superficial differences are not so important.
   It’s possible to see that there’s a kind of “level of contact” in
the group. The thought process is an extension of the body
process, and all the body language is showing it, and so on.
People are really in rather close contact — hate is an extremely
close bond. I remember somebody saying that when people are
in really close contact, talking about something which is very
important to them, their whole bodies are involved — their
hearts, their adrenalin, all the neurochemicals, everything. They
are in far closer contact with each other than with some parts
of their own bodies, such as their toes. So, in some sense there
is established in that contact “one body.” And also, if we can

=== p. 32 ===

all listen to each other’s opinions, and suspend them without
judging them, and your opinion is on the same basis as anyone
else’s, then we all have “one mind” because we have the same
content — all the opinions, all the assumptions. At that moment
the difference is secondary. Then you have in some sense one |
body, one mind. It does not overwhelm the individual. There is
no conflict in the fact that the individual does not agree. It’s not
all that important whether you agree or not. There is no pressure
to agree or disagree.
  The point is that we would establish, on another level, a kind
of bond, which is called impersonal fellowship. You don’t have
to know each other. In England, for example, the football crowds
prefer not to have seats in their football stands, but just to stand
bunched against each other. In those crowds very few people
know each other, but they still feel something — that contact —
which is missing in their ordinary personal relations. And in
war many people feel that there’s a kind of comradeship which
they miss in peacetime. It’s the same sort of thing — that close
connection, that fellowship, that mutual participation. I think
people find this lacking in our society, which glorifies the separate individual. The communists were trying to establish something else, but they completely failed in a very miserable way.
Now a lot of them have adopted the same values as we have.
But people are not entirely happy with that. They feel isolated.
Even those who “succeed” feel isolated, feel there’s another side
they are missing.
   I am saying that this is a reason for dialogue. We really do
need to have it. This reason should be strong enough to get us
through all the frustration we talked about. People generally
seem ready to accept frustration with anything that they regard
as important. Doing your job or making money, for example, is
often frustrating; it produces anxiety. Yet people will say, “That
is important! We have to stick with it.” They feel that way about
all sorts of things. I’m saying that if we regard dialogue as
important, as necessary, we will say about it as well, “We will
stick to it.” But if we don’t think it is necessary, we might say,
“Okay, what's the point? This is too much trouble. Let’s give it
up. It’s not producing anything.” You see, you have to explore
anything new for a while. In science, or anywhere, you usually
have to go through a period where you are not getting anywhere

=== p. 33 ===

                                  é
while you are exploring. It can, nevertheless, be very discouraging. —
  If we can all suspend carrying out our impulses, suspend our
assumptions, and look at them all, then we are all in the same
state of consciousness. And therefore we have established the
thing that many people say they want — a common consciousness. It may not be very pleasant, but we have got it. People
tend to think of common consciousness as “shared bliss.” That
may come; but if it does, I’m saying that the road to it is through
this. We have to share the consciousness that we actually have.
We can’t just impose another one. But if people can share the
frustration and share their different contradictory assumptions
and share their mutual anger and stay with it — if everybody is
angry together, and looking at it together - then you have a
common consciousness.
   If people could stay with power, violence, hate, or whatever
it is, all the way to the end, then it would sort of collapse —
because ultimately they would see that we are all the same.
And consequently they would have participation and fellowship. People who have gone through that can become good
friends. The whole thing goes differently. They become more
open and trusting to each other. They have already gone through
the thing that they are afraid of, so the intelligence can then work.
   There’s a story I would like to relate in this connection. I
knew a man in London who had been a child psychiatrist. He
told me that somebody once brought to him a girl about seven
years old who was very disturbed. She refused to talk to anybody. They brought her hoping that he would help to get her
talking. So he tried for about an hour and got nowhere. Finally,
getting exasperated, he said, ‘Why don’t you talk to me?” She
answered,   “Because   I hate you.” He thought that he had to
bring time into this somewhere to defuse it. So he said, “How
long will you hate me?” She said, “T’ll hate you forever.” He
was then a bit worried, so he brought time in again. He asked,
“How long will you hate me forever?” Then she burst out
laughing and the whole thing was broken. The energy which
had been there was now available. The absurdity of the thing
was shown to her — that the thing was incoherent. She was
saying that she was going to hate him forever, and she could
see that that wouldn’t really be so; and if that’s not so, then the

=== p. 34 ===

idea that she has got to go on' with the hatred is not necessary
either.
   When you have anger, it has a reason, or a cause. You say
that you are angry because of this, this, or that. It builds up to
rage and hate, at which point it no longer has a particular .
reason anymore — sit just sustains itself. That energy of hate is
sort of locked up, and then it’s looking for an occasion to
discharge. The same holds with panic. You are usually aware of
a reason for your fear, but by the time you get to panic it goes
on by itself. However, the sort of energy that goes around at
that level may also in a vague way be the kind of energy we
are talking about for creativity — namely, an energy without a
reason.
   But there is a great deal of violence in the opinions that we
are defending. They are not merely opinions, they are not merely
assumptions; they are assumptions with which we are identified
— which we are therefore defending, because it is as if we are
defending ourselves. The natural self-defense impulse, which we
got in the jungle, has been transferred from the jungle animals to
these opinions. In other words, we say that there are some
dangerous opinions out there — just as there might be dangerous
tigers. And there are some very precious animals inside us that
have to be defended. So an impulse that made sense physically
in the jungle has been transferred to our opinions in our modern
life. And in a dialogue, we get to be aware of that in a collective
way.
   As long as we have this defensive attitude — blocking and
holding assumptions, sticking to them and saying, “I’ve got to
be right,” and that sort of thing - then intelligence is very
limited, because intelligence requires that you don’t defend an
assumption. There is no reason to hold to an assumption if
there is evidence that it is not right. The proper structure of an
assumption or of an opinion is that it is are to evidence that
it may not be right.
   That does not mean that we are going to impose the opinions of the
group. In this way the collective can often be troublesome. The
group may act like a conscience, inducing powerful guilt feelings in its members, because we are all so built that we tend to
regard what everybody agrees on as true. Everybody may or
may not have a different opinion — it is not that important. It
isn’t necessary that everybody be convinced to have the same

=== p. 35 ===

                                 é
view. This sharing of mind, of consciousness, is more important
than the content of the opinions. And you may see that these
opinions are limited anyway. You may find that the answer is
not in the opinions at all, but somewhere else. Truth does not
emerge from opinions; it must emerge from something else —
perhaps from a more free movement of the tacit mind. So we
have to get meanings coherent if we are going to perceive truth,
or to take part in truth. That is ‘why I say the dialogue is so
important. If our meanings are incoherent, how are we going to
participate in truth?
   I think this new approach could open the way to changing
the whole world situation — ecologically, and in other ways. For
instance, the ecological movement,    the “green movement,”     is
now in danger of fragmenting and splitting, because many of
those groups have different opinions about how to deal with
the problems. So they can wind up fighting each other as much
as they fight for the ecology. Consequently, it seems particularly
urgent that the green movement get into dialogue.
   People concerned with the ecology are clearly aware of some
of our planetary problems, but I think that many of them may
not be as aware of their assumptions and tacit thought processes.
I think it is important to call attention to this explicitly in a
clear way, so that it becomes clear what the basic problem is.
These kinds of activities go together. Cleaning up the rivers and
planting trees and saving the whales should go together with
dialogue, and with seeing the general problem of thought. They
all belong together, because any one of those activities by itself
is not enough. If we all just talk about thought and think about
thought for a long while, the whole planet may be destroyed in
the meantime. But I think that dialogue will work in this tacit
level of mental process, where the most significant things take
  lace.
‘ There are situations where people have differing assumptions
and opinions, where one faction is interested and the other isn’t.
Still, somehow,   we have got to have a dialogue. Even if one
faction won’t participate, we who are willing can participate in
a dialogue between our thought and their thought. We can at
least dialogue among ourselves as far as we can, or you may
by yourself. That is the attitude of dialogue. And the further
this attitude could spread, the more I think it would help to
bring order. If we really could do something creative, it might

=== p. 36 ===

 still affect other people on a tacit level. It would really communicate at the tacit level, both with words and beyond words.
 But if we keep on repeating the same old story, then it won’t
 happen.
    This notion of dialogue and common consciousness suggests             _
 that there is some way out of our collective difficulties. And we
 have to begin at the grass roots, as it were, not to begin at the
 top of the heap with the United Nations or with the President.
 I know that there are people in the US State Department who
 are familiar with this idea of dialogue, which shows how these
 ideas do percolate and may even reach the highest levels. This
 indicates that things can communicate very fast in this modern
 world — though that may look very insignificant at first. In three
 to five steps it might reach all sorts of levels. Just as the destructive things communicate, so this idea of dialogue could communicate, too.
   As we    ourselves stay with the frustrations of dialogue, the
  meaning of what we are doing may be much more than will
  appear at first sight. In fact, we could say that instead of being
  part of the problem, we become part of the solution. In other
  words, our very movement has the quality of the solution; it is
  part of it. However small it is, it has the quality of the solution
  and not the quality of the problem. However big the larger
  movement is, it has the quality of the problem, not of the
  solution. Accordingly, the major point is to start something
  which has the quality of the solution. As I have said, we don’t
  know how fast or slowly it would spread. We don’t know how
' fast a movement in the mind — in the thought process and
  beyond the thought process, this sharing together — will spread.
     People sometimes say, “All we really need is love.” Of course,
  that’s true — if there were universal love, all would go well. But
  we don’t appear to have it. So we have to find a way that
  works. Even though there may be frustration and anger and
  rage and hate and fear, we have to find something which can
  take all that in.
     To illustrate the point, here is a story about the two leading
  physicists of this century, Albert Einstein and Niels Bohr. Ein-stein remembered    that when he first met Bohr, he felt close to
 him. He wrote of a feeling of love for him. They talked physics
 in a very animated way, and so on. But they finally came upon
 a point where they had two different assumptions, or opinions,

=== p. 37 ===

about what was the way to truth. Bohr’s judgments were based
on his view of quantum theory, and Einstein’s on his view of
relativity. They talked it over again and again in a very patient
way, with all goodwill. It went on for years, and neither of them
yielded. Each one just repeated what he had been saying before.
So finally they found that they weren’t getting anywhere, and
they gradually drifted apart. They didn’t see each other for a
long time after that.
   Then one year, both of them were at the Institute for
Advanced Study at Princeton, but they still didn’t meet each
other. A mathematician named Herman Wey] said, “It would
be nice if they got together. It’s a pity that they don’t.” So he
arranged a party to which Einstein and Bohr and their respective
students were invited. Einstein and his associates stayed at one
end of the room, and Bohr and his associates stayed at the
other end. They couldn’t get together because they had nothing
to talk about. They couldn’t share any meaning, because each
one felt his meaning was true. How can you share if you are
sure you have truth and the other fellow is sure he has truth,
and the truths don’t agree? How can you share?
  Therefore,   you have   to watch   out for the notion   of truth.
Dialogue may not be concerned directly with truth - it may
arrive at truth, but it is concerned with meaning. If the meaning
is incoherent you will never arrive at truth. You may think, “My
meaning is coherent and somebody else’s isn’t,” but then we’ll
never have meaning shared. You will have the “truth” for yourself or for your own group, whatever consolation that is. But
we will continue to have conflict.
   If it is necessary to share meaning and share truth, then we
have to do something different. Bohr and Einstein probably
should have had a dialogue. I’m not saying that they could have
had one, but in a dialogue they might have listened properly
to each other’s opinion. And perhaps they both would have
suspended their opinions, and moved out beyond relativity and
beyond quantum theory into something new. They might have
done   that in principle, but I don’t think that this notion of
dialogue had occurred to scientists then.
   Science is predicated on the concept that science is arriving
at truth — at a unique truth. The idea of dialogue is thereby in
some   way foreign to the current structure of science, as it is
with religion. In a way, science has become the religion of the

=== p. 38 ===

modern age. It plays the role which religion used to play of
giving us truth; hence different scientists cannot come together
any more than different religions can, once they have different
notions of truth. As one scientist, Max Planck; said, “New ideas
don’t win, really. What happens is that the old scientists die .
and new ones come along with new ideas.” But clearly that’s
not the right way to do it. This is not to say that science couldn't
work another way. If scientists could engage in a dialogue, that
would be a radical revolution in science — in the very nature of
science. Actually, scientists are in principle committed to the
concepts involved in dialogue. They say, “We must listen. We
shouldn’t exclude anything.”
   However, they find that they can’t do that. This is not only
because scientists share what everybody else shares — assumptions and opinions — but also because the very notion which
has been defining science today is that we are going to get truth.
Few scientists question the assumption that thought is capable
of coming to know “everything.” But that may not be a valid
assumption, because thought is abstraction, which inherently
implies limitation. The whole is too much. There is no way by
which thought can get hold of the whole, because thought only
abstracts; it limits and defines. And the past from which thought
draws contains only a certain limited amount. The present is
not contained in thought; thus, an analysis cannot actually cover
the moment of analysis.
   There are also the relativists, who say that we are never going
to get at an absolute truth. But they are caught in a paradox of
their own. They are assuming that relativism is the absolute
truth. So it is clear that people who believe that they are arriving
at any kind of absolute truth can’t make a dialogue, not even
among themselves. Even different relativists don’t agree.
   So we can see that there is no “road” to truth. What we are
trying to say is that in this dialogue we share all the roads and
we finally see that none of them matters. We see the meaning
of all the roads, and therefore we come to the “no road.” Underneath, all the roads are the same because of the very fact that
they are “roads” — they are rigid.
  We've said that in a dialogue there will be frustrations, but
you might become better friends if you can get through all that.
Not that we demand affection. We don’t demand friendship; we
don’t demand anything, though friendship may come. If you see

=== p. 39 ===

other people's thought, it becomes your own thought, and you treat it
as your own thought. And when an emotional charge comes up, you
share all the emotional charges, too, if they affect you; you hold them
together with all the thoughts. Often, when there is an emotional
charge somebody can come in to defuse the issue a bit so that
it doesn’t run away - as the child psychiatrist defused it with
his asking, “How long will you hate me forever?” Or some
other sort of humor may defuse ‘the issue, or something else —
some appropriate remark which you can’t foresee.
   Sometimes you may find that you are about to raise a question, but someone else brings it up. In such a case, that thought
is probably latent in the group as a whole, implicit. And one
person may say it, or somebody else may say it. Then another
person may pick it up and carry it along. If the group is really
working, that would be thinking together - common participation in thinking - as if it were all one process. That one
thought is being formed together. Then, if somebody comes up
with another assumption, we        all listen to that, we share that
meaning. Now that would
                      be the “vision of dialogue.”

                SENSITIVITY        IN DIALOGUE
What we have been discussing has not been common in human
society, although it is really what is necessary if the society is
to cohere. If people would do this in government or in business
or internationally, our society would work differently. But then,
that requires sensitivity — a certain way of knowing how to come
in and how not to come in, of watching all the subtle cues and
the senses and your response to them — what’s happening inside
of you, what’s happening in the group. People may show what
is happening to them in the stance of their body — by their
“body language” — as well as by what they say.
   They are not trying to do this purposefully, but you will find
that it develops. That’s part of the communication. It will be
non-verbal as well as verbal. You’re not trying to do it at all.
You may not even be aware that it is happening.
   Sensitivity is being able to sense that something is happening, to sense the way you respond, the way other people
respond, to sense the subtle differences and similarities. To sense
all this is the foundation of perception. The senses provide you
with information, but you have to be sensitive to it or you won't

=== p. 40 ===

see it. If you know a person very well, you may pass him on
the street and say, “I saw him.” If you are asked what the
person was wearing, however, you may not know, because you
didn’t really look. You were not sensitive to all that, because
you saw that person through the screen of thought. And that was |
not sensitivity.
   So sensitivity involves the senses, and also something beyond.
The senses are sensitive to certain things to which they respond,
but that’s not enough. The senses will tell you what is happening, and then the consciousness must build a form, or create
some sense of what it means, which holds it together. Therefore,
meaning is part of it. You are sensitive to the meaning, or to
the lack of meaning. It’s perception of meaning, if you want
to put it that way. In other words, it is a more subtle perception.
The meaning is what holds it together. As I said, it is the
“cement.” Meaning is not static — it is flowing. And if we have
the meaning being shared, then ‘it is flowing among us; it
holds the group together. Then everybody is sensitive to all the
nuances going around, not merely to what is happening in his
own mind. From that forms a meaning which is shared. And in
that way we can talk together coherently and think together.
Whereas generally people hold to their assumptions, so they are
not thinking together. Each one is on his own.
   What blocks sensitivity is the defense of your assumptions
and opinions. But if you are defending your opinions, you don’t
judge yourself and say, “I shouldn’t be defending.” Rather, the
fact is that you are defending, and you then need to be sensitive
to that — to all the feelings in that, all the subtle nuances. We
are not aiming for the type of group that condemns and judges,
and so forth — we can all realize that that would get in the way.
So this group is not going to judge or condemn. It is simply
going to look at all the opinions and assumptions and let them
surface. And I think that there could then be a change.
   Krishnamurti said that “to be” is to be related. But relationship can be very painful. He said that you have to think/feel
out all your mental processes and work them through, and then
that will open the way to something else. And I think that is
what can happen in the dialogue group. Certain painful things
can happen for some people; you have to work it all out.
   We once had a dialogue in Sweden, in which the group
seemed to divide itself into two factions. There were a lot of

=== p. 41 ===

                                 é
“New Age” people, and from the beginning they began to talk
about the virtues of love and the fact that the place was full of
love all around, that it was all love everywhere. Part of the
group remained silent for a while, but in the next hour they
started to talk. They intimated that the love talk was all sentimental nonsense and didn’t mean anything. Then one fellow
got so excited that he couldn’t stand it, and he walked out.
He eventually came back, and they finally got together again.
Polarization had taken place, which is a typical difficulty that
can arise. Someone noticed the polarization happening and said
with a bit of good humor, “There are two groups here — the
love group and the hate group.” That broke the tension a little,
and the two sides could then begin to talk. They didn’t necessarily convince each other, but each was able to see the meaning
of the other side’s position, and the two polarized groups were
able to talk to each other.
   Now, that was a more important point than whether they
convinced each other. They might find that they both have to
give up their positions so that something else can come about.
It was not important whether one favored love or one favored
hate or another favored being suspicious and careful and somewhat cynical, or whatever. Really, underneath they were similar,
because they both had rigid positions. Loosening that position,
then, was the key change.
   On the whole, you could say that if you are defending your
opinions, you are not serious. Likewise, if you are trying to
avoid something unpleasant inside of yourself, that is also not
being serious. A great deal of our whole life is not serious. And
society teaches you that. It teaches you not to be very serious —
that there are all sorts of incoherent things, and there is
nothing that can be done about it, and that you will only stir
yourself up uselessly by being serious.
   But in a dialogue you have to be serious. It is not a dialogue
if you are not — not in the way I’m using the word. There is a
story about Freud when he had cancer of the mouth. Somebody
came up to him and wanted to talk to him about a point in
psychology. The person said, “Perhaps I’d better not talk to you,
because you've got this cancer which is very serious. You may
not want to talk about this.” Freud’s answer was, “This cancer
may be fatal, but it’s not serious.” And actually, of course, it
was just a lot of cells growing. I think a great deal of what goes

=== p. 42 ===

on in society could be described that way -— that it may well be
fatal, but it’s not serious.

                      LIMITED       DIALOGUE

Sometimes people feel a sense of dialogue within their families.
But a family is generally a hierarchy, organized on the principle
of authority which is contrary to dialogue. The family is a very
authoritative   structure, based    on obligation, and that sort of
thing. It has its value, but it is a structure within which it might
be difficult to get dialogue going. It would be'good if you could
— perhaps that could happen in some families. In general it is
difficult, though, because there is no place in the dialogue for
the principle of authority and hierarchy. We want to be free of
hierarchy and authority as we move. You must have some
authority to “run” things; that’s why we say that if you have
a “purpose,” then you are bound to bring in some authority
somewhere. But in dialogue, insofar as we have no purpose and
no agenda and we don’t have to do anything, we don’t really
need to have an authority or a hierarchy. Rather, we need a
place where there is no authority, no hierarchy, where there is
no special purpose — sort of an empty place, where we can let
anything be talked about.
   As we said, you can also have a dialogue in a more limited
way — perhaps with a purpose or a goal in mind. It would be
best to accept the principle of letting it be open, because when
you limit it, you are accepting assumptions on the basis of
which you limit it - assumptions that may actually be getting
in the way of free communication. So you are not looking at
those assumptions.
   However, if people are not ready to be completely open in
their communication, they should do what they can. I know
some university professors who are interested in applying the
principles of dialogue to corporate problems. One of them
recently had a meeting with the executive officers of a corporation that makes office furniture. They wanted to have this
sort of meeting, because they knew that they were not functioning efficiently and that they couldn’t agree. The higher officers
had all sorts of assumptions that blocked everything. So they
asked him to come in. He started a dialogue which they found

=== p. 43 ===

                          ON BA EOE

very interesting, and now they want to have a whole series of
them.
   Naturally, that sort of dialogue will be limited — the people
involved do have a definite purpose, which is limiting — but
even so, it has considerable value. The principle is at least to
get people to come to know each other’s assumptions, so they
can listen to their assumptions and know what they are. Very
often people get into problems where they don’t really know
what the other person’s assumption is, and they react according
to what they think it is. That person then gets very puzzled and
wonders: what is he doing? He reacts, and it all gets very
muddled. So it is valuable if they can at least get to realize each
other’s assumptions.
   The professor told me about two interesting cases. One
involved a company which had trouble with people in the
higher executive branches who were not very happy and were
not getting on with each other. The company’s usual way of
solving it was to offer them a higher salary, sort of a sweetener,
and a lot of mediocre people were given the very highest possible positions. It went on and on, and pretty soon there were so
many people with high salaries that the company couldn't
afford it; they were failing. They said, “What can we do? Well,
we've got to have somebody who’s tough, who will tell these
people, “You have to accept another position.’ ” The negotiator
that they used explained the new policies by saying, “The company just can’t afford it.” But he was avoiding the issue. He
was not straightforwardly saying, “This whole approach is
wrong.” Now, if the company is to work efficiently, there must
be a mutual agreement that they are not going to give a person a
higher position just to alleviate a psychological problem between
people. That’s not a right way to proceed. Everybody should
understand that that is not the right way of working, otherwise
the company won’t succeed. Therefore, a dialogue was needed
so that they could really begin talking with each other in order
to come to see clearly the salient points: ‘“‘That’s the way we are
thinking, that’s where the problems are coming from, and that’s
the way we have to go.” So within the framework of assuming
that the company has to survive, there was a limited kind of
dialogue — not the kind we ultimately want to have here, but
still it was good in some way.
   Now, I am suggesting that the human race has got to do that.

=== p. 44 ===

We could say that the human race is failing for the same sort
of reason that the company was failing.
   The second case involved the negotiating group itself, the
university people whose specialty it is to go into companies and
help solve these problems. They were organizing a meeting
among themselves with the same purpose — just so they could
talk. They had a series of meetings where it happened that two
of their people could never quite meet on any issue. One of
them constantly had the assumption that the right thing to do
was to bring out the trouble — to confront somebody with it.
And the other person had the opposite assumption, which was
that you shouldn’t do that. He wanted other people to draw
him out. He felt that he couldn’t say something unless other
people created the space for him to talk, and drew him out. The
first fellow wouldn’t do that, he did the opposite. So they
couldn’t meet. The whole thing went on for a long time ‘in
confusion, with the one person waiting to be drawn out, and
the other person not understanding that this was the case.
Finally they got to talking, and each one actually brought up
childhood experiences which were behind his assumptions -—
and then it opened up.
   The fellow who was working as facilitator during this time
did very little. In fact, several of the people appealed to the
facilitator and said, “Why don’t you talk?” The facilitator may
come in from time to time and comment on what is going on
or what it all means. In a more general group he should eventually be able to be just a participant. Probably in the company
group this wouldn’t work, though; he couldn’t become just a
participant — such a group has too limited an objective.
   This second example might be an illustration of when the
personal may have to come into the general, because in certain
cases there are blocks due to particular assumptions that the
person got hold of in childhood, or in some other way. And in
this example, they were finally able to uncover those assumptions. They weren’t trying to heal each other, or to do therapy;
nevertheless, it had a therapeutic effect. But that’s a secondary
thing.
  Some people feel that that type of corporate dialogue is only
furthering a corrupt system. However, there is a germ of something different. I think that if you go into society, you will find
that almost everything is involved in this corrupt game. So it
                                dd.

=== p. 45 ===

                                  é
doesn’t accomplish anything to dismiss it all. The executives
have got to make the company work; and in fact, if all these
companies would work more efficiently we would all be a lot
better off. It’s partly because they are in such a mess that we
are in trouble, that society is inefficient, that the whole thing is
falling apart. If the government and the companies could all
work efficiently, we wouldn’t be so wasteful, even though that
by itself wouldn’t solve all the problems.
   For the society to be working right, all those things have got
to work efficiently and coherently. If we look at what is going
on in the world today, in this or in any country, we can say that
it is not working coherently. Most companies are not really
working coherently. And slowly the thing is sinking. I think
that if you can get this notion across in whatever situation — the
germ of the notion of dialogue — if you can get people to look
at it, it’s a step. You could say that heads of state are not likely
to have the kind of dialogue that we are talking about. But if
they will have any kind at all, if they’ll begin to accept this
principle, it’s a step. It may make a change; for instance, the
kind of waste of energy which is going on in the production of
armaments could be cut down. If we could stop the tremendous
amount that’s being spent on armaments - let’s say a trillion
dollars a year — that could be used for ecological regeneration
and all sorts of constructive things. And possibly some of that
might happen. Those political figures who are more aware of
the ecological problem might, for instance, make the President
more aware of it, if they would really talk. Not that we can
expect the politicians to solve the problems we face. But I’m
saying that if there’s a slight movement toward something more
open, the rate of destruction will slow down. If we go on at
this rate, we may have very little time to do anything.
   We can’t do anything at the level of presidents or prime
ministers. They have their own opinions. But the various ideas
filter, as we've said. Somehow    the notion of something a little
bit like dialogue has filtered to that level, and it may have an
effect; that’s all I am saying. I think that in the US government
there are some people who are more this way, and some people
who are more the other way. We don’t know how it is going to
come out, but there is a certain movement toward something
more open. I don’t say that it is going to solve the whole
thing; I am saying that if it slows down the destruction, that’s

=== p. 46 ===

important, because unless the destruction is slowed down to
give time for something new to emerge, it will be too late.
  There may be no pat political answer to the world’s problems.
However, the important point is not the answer — just as in a
dialogue, the important point is not the particular opinions — ,
but rather the softening up, the opening up of the mind, and
looking at all the opinions. If there is some sort of spread of
that attitude, I think it can slow down the destruction.
  So we've said that it is crucial to be able to share our judgments,   to share   our   assumptions,   to listen   to each   other’s
assumptions. In the case of Einstein and Bohr it didn’t lead to
violence that they did not; but in general, if somebody doesn’t
listen to your basic assumptions you feel it as an act of violence,
and then you are inclined to be violent yourself. Therefore, this
is crucial both individually and collectively. Dialogue is the
collective way of opening up judgments and assumptions. ©

                     BEYOND      DIALOGUE
We should keep in mind, nonetheless, that the dialogue — and
in fact, all that we’ve been talking about — is not only directed
at solving the ills of society, although we do have to solve those
ills. We would be much better off if we didn’t have them. If we
survive and we want to have a worthwhile life, we have to deal
with those problems. But ultimately that’s not the entire story.
That’s only the beginning. I’m suggesting that there is the possibility for a transformation of the nature of consciousness, both
individually and collectively, and that whether this can be
solved culturally and socially depends on dialogue. That’s what
we're exploring.
   And it’s very important that it happens together, because if
one individual changes it will have very little general effect. But
if it happens collectively, it means a lot more. If some of us
come to the “truth,” so-called, while a lot of people are left out,
it’s not going to solve the problem. We would have another
conflict — just as there is conflict between different parts of the
Christian   faith or the Muhammadan        faith or various    others,
even though they all believe in the same God, the same prophet
or the same savior.
   Love will go away if we can’t communicate and share meaning. The love between Einstein and Bohr gradually evaporated

=== p. 47 ===

because they could not communicate. However, if we can really
communicate, then we will have fellowship, participation,
friendship, and love, growing and growing. That would be the
way. The question is really: do you see the necessity of this
process? That’s the key question. If you see that it is absolutely
necessary, then you have to do something.
  And perhaps in dialogue, when we have this very high energy
of coherence, it might bring us beyond just being a group that
could solve social problems. Possibly it could make a new
change in the individual and a change in the relation to the
cosmic. Such an energy has been called “communion.” It is a
kind of participation. The early Christians had a Greek word,
koinonia, the root of which means “to participate” — the idea of
partaking of the whole and taking part in it; not merely the
whole group, but the whole.

