=== chunk: bohm-1996-on-dialogue/ch5-observer-observed ===
title: The Observer and the Observed
source_pdf: docs/sources/bohm-1996-on-dialogue/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 89-91
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 69
plan_page_end: 71
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 69 ===

                                é

     THE OBSERVER AND THE
           OBSERVED

Normally we don’t see that our assumptions are affecting the
nature of our observations. But the assumptions affect the way
we see things, the way we experience them, and, consequently,
the things that we want to do. In a way, we are looking through
our assumptions; the assumptions could be said to be an
observer in a sense. The meaning of the word “observe” you
could get from defining “observation” as “gathering with the
eye,” or “listening” as “gathering with the ear.” That is, everything in the room you are in is gathered together and comes to
the pupil of the eye, the retina, and to the brain; or it may also
come through the ear. So the observer is what gathers: it selects
and gathers the relevant information and organizes it into some
meaning and picture. And that is what’s done by the assumptions in thought. According to what you assume, you will collect
and gather certain information as important and put it together
in a certain way, in a certain structure.
   Therefore, the assumptions are functioning as a kind of
observer. When we observe we forget that, and we are looking
without taking that into account. But this “observer” profoundly
affects what it is observing, and is also affected by what it is
observing — there is really very little separation between them. If
the emotions are what are being observed, then the “observing”
assumptions are profoundly affected by the emotions, and the
emotions are profoundly affected by the assumptions. On the
other hand, if you say the emotions are the observer, and are
determining the way things are organized, then the assumptions
will be the observed. Either way, the observed is profoundly
affected by the observer, and the observer by the observed -—

=== p. 70 ===

                         ON DIALOGUE
they really are one cycle, one process. The separation between
them is not very significant.
  If, on the other hand, I observe a chair on the other side of
the room, what’s going on in me is not very much affected by
the chair; and what's going on in the chair is not profoundiy
affected by me. We,could say in that case that the observer is
significantly different from the observed. But when looking at
your emotions or looking at your thoughts, that cannot be the
case. Similarly, when looking at society or looking at another
person, what you see depends on your assumptions, and you
will get an emotional reaction from that person which enters
you and affects the way you see.
   Therefore, at a certain stage the distinction between the
observer and the observed cannot be maintained, or as Krishna-murti used to say, the observer is the observed. If you don’t put
the two together, the observer and the observed — if you don’t
put the assumptions together with the emotions — then the
whole thing will be wrong. If I say I am going to look into my
mind but I don’t consider my assumptions, then the picture is
wrong because the assumptions are looking. That is a common
problem of introspection. You say, “I am going to look at myself
inwardly,” but the assumptions are not looked at — the assumptions are looking.
   You could imagine a television program on the observer and
the observed. There would be one person who would be the
observer, and the other would be the observed. They would go
through all the motions, so that one was quite carefully looking
at the other, and the other was somewhat uncomfortable being
looked at. You would get a feeling that the observer was looking
at the observed. That’s just the sort of thing going on in the
mind: thought is producing an image of an observer and an
image of the observed, and it’s attributing itself to a thinker
who is producing the thought and doing the observing. It’s also
attributing its being to the observed at the same time, just as
we do ordinarily with regard to the body.
   Just as I can observe the room that I am in, I can observe my
body. But I also know that I am my body, and I experience this
in another way, through sensations. This experience is then
reproduced inwardly, through imagination and fantasy, as the
observer and the observed. And as with the body, this is felt to
be reality, the reality of the self.

=== p. 71 ===

               THE OBSERVER * eae THE OBSERVED

   This is a suggestion as to how it may work — that thought
has come to attribute itself to an image of an observer, a thinker.
This gives it much greater authority, because it has then apparently come from a being who should know what to think. On
the other hand, if it’s just going mechanically, it might have no
more significance than a computer. But if you imagined there
was a little being inside the computer, this too would take on
much greater authority.
   Consider the case of a blind man and his stick. If he holds
the stick tightly when he is tapping, he feels the stick is “me”
— he feels that he contacts the world at the end of the stick. If
he holds the stick loosely, the stick is not me, but my hand is
me. But then he may think, “My hand is not me, ‘I’ want to
move ‘my’ hand.” Therefore, there is something further inside
that is still me, which is moving my hand. He keeps going more
and more inward, taking off more and more, and saying, “That’s
not me, that’s not me — I am going to look at these things, they
are not essential to ‘me.’” And he may get the feeling of the
internal organs, the sense of the muscles, and think, “They are
not me — I am just looking somewhere inside.” And he could
go on, peeling off the layers of the onion until he got to the
very essence, the center, which at some point would really be
“me.” At some point he would say, “There must be some essential innermost ‘me’ that sort of looks at everything.” That’s the
way people are thinking - everybody feels that way.
   I am suggesting, however, that thought is a system belonging
to the whole culture and society, evolving over history, and it
creates the image of an individual who is supposed to be the
source of thought. It gives the sense of an individual who is
perceived and experienced. This would be conducive to the next
step, which is for thought to claim that it only tells you the way
things are and then the individual inside decides what to do
with the information — he chooses. This is the picture which
emerged gradually; thought tells you the way things are, and
then “you” choose how to act from that information.
   You may look at this and try to reason and see what is
wrong. You begin to doubt, saying, “Whatever is behind this is
doubtful.” But very often, the first questions you ask will contain the very presupposition that should be doubted. As an
example, I may question some belief, but I may question it
through what amounts to another belief. So you have to be

