=== chunk: bohm-1996-on-dialogue/ch6-suspension-proprioception ===
title: Suspension, the Body, and Proprioception
source_pdf: docs/sources/bohm-1996-on-dialogue/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 92-103
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 72
plan_page_end: 83
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 72 ===

sensitive to the whole of what you are doing. What happens is
that it seems that there is a “doubter” who doubts. Somewhere
“back in the back” is somebody who is observing what is wrong,
but he is not being observed. The very “wrong” things which he
should be looking at are in the one who is looking, because that
is the safest place to. hide them. Hide them in the looker, and
the looker will never find them.

                              y

=== p. 73 ===

                                @

      SUSPENSION, THE BODY,
       AND PROPRIOCEPTION

We are trying to get deeper, to the very essence of the whole
process that is behind the self, or the observer. The general
difficulty that one has — in both listening and looking — is that
if there is listening through a “listener,” then we are not listening. Some part of you steps back and listens to the rest. If there
is listening without a listener, then that is similar to observing
without an observer. Everybody can do that on certain occasions
— you take an action, and you are not observing yourself while
you are doing it. You just  do it. But then on other occasions you
find it hard to do this. So really we have come to the question
of what is needed to go deeply into observation, so that you
can look at yourself without a “looker,” or listen to yourself, or
other people, without a “listener.”
   The first point is, what are we going to look at or listen to
in connection with this issue? Suppose we have aggression or
resistance. If a person is aggressive, he first acts — he may act
physically, or with words, or with gestures and expressions — in
some way he acts. Now, he doesn’t know that he is acting when
he acts. He doesn’t know he is being aggressive, he just thinks,
“I am right,” or, “I have been attacked, this is necessary.” He
doesn’t feel it as aggression. Then at some point he may notice
what is happening. He may think, “I am aggressive, I mustn't
be aggressive.” That suppresses the action, which means that
you are still aggressive, against yourself. So it hasn’t changed. The
observer of aggression is pervaded with aggression. Therefore,
nothing happens.
   There is another action, which is neither to carry out the
aggression, nor to turn it against yourself by suppressing it.
Rather, you may suspend the activity, allowing it to reveal itself,

=== p. 74 ===

to flower, to unfold, and so you see the aggression and its actual
structure inside of you. Movements are taking place inside of
you — physical feelings — the heartbeat, the blood pressure, the
way you breathe, the way your body feels tense; and also
the kinds of thoughts that go along with these feelings. You can
observe these things, be aware of them, and of their connection.
Ordinarily all those feelings and bodily reactions are taken to —
be one thing, and the thoughts something else, unconnected.
But as you become    aware   of the connection, it becomes   more
clear that they are not independent of one another.
   The human race doesn’t do a great deal of suspension of this
sort. I think that it is a natural potential, but that we have not
developed in such a way as to favor it very much. Our development has been more toward a kind of immediate impulsive
response that is favorable to violence. For example, you may
often be in a situation where you think that a violent reaction
is going to pay. Or you may say, “Society says one ought not
to be violent. I will try not to be violent.” But meanwhile you
continue the thoughts that are making you violent. Either way
you don’t get anywhere. Violence thus constantly tends to grow.
It goes into the “program,” into the memory. The more you are
violent, the more you leave a program for violence; then it
becomes more and more automatic. I think that is one major
factor. There is also a hereditary factor, which is that we may
have some tendency to respond with force where we should
suspend. But even in the jungle, force is not called for all the
time. In fact, mostly suspension is what is called for, and force
only occasionally. To survive there, you really would have to
learn suspension.
   In the process of suspension, you may notice two things. First,
that physical reactions are being produced by thought, and
therefore are not as significant as they would be if they were
not being produced by thought. The tremendously excited state
of your body, which seems one of the reasons why you should
do something, is no longer as significant as you had thought.
Second, you can get direct evidence that the thoughts are affecting the feelings and the feelings are affecting the thoughts without passing through “me.”
   The ordinary picture is that the only connection between
thoughts, feelings, and actions is the central entity who does it
all and experiences it all. That is one idea of how everything is

=== p. 75 ===

connected up, and that is why the “central entity” is felt to be
so important: everything goes through him. He is at their source,
their center. But in fact you can get evidence that thoughts and
feelings move as processes on their own; they are not being run
by “me.” They are not being produced by the me, and they are
not being experienced by the me.
  There is, however,    some   self-reference built into the whole
system. There is what is called proprioception, or “self-perception.” Physically, a person is aware immediately that he has
moved a part of his body. If some outside force suddenly moved
your arm, you could tell that that is different from having
moved it yourself. The nerves are built so as to be able to know
that. In this connection,   there was   a woman     who   suffered a
stroke while she was asleep, and she woke up apparently being
attacked by somebody. But when the light was turned on, she
was hitting herself. Her sensory nerves had been damaged, but
not the motor nerves; therefore she had no way of knowing she
was hitting herself. Consequently she assumed that something
else was hitting her, and the more she struggled against the
“assailant,” the more she was hitting herself. So there is proprioception in the body - the distinction between actions which
originate in the body, and those which originate outside, is
perceived as a functional difference. In this light, the notion that
there is a self as a kind of center, the body as a center of activity,
is natural. Animals obviously have it too, and they can make
that distinction. We can therefore say that this notion of “I”
cannot be entirely wrong, or it probably would never have
arisen.
   The question is: how does this natural, useful distinction turn
into the contradictions of the ego? Something that was correct
and useful has somehow developed in a way which has gone
wrong. Thought lacks proprioception, and we have got to learn,
somehow, to observe thought. In the case of observing the body,
you can tell that observation is somehow taking place — even
when there is no sense of a distinct observer.
   Is it possible for thought similarly to observe itself, to see
what it is doing, perhaps by awakening some other sense of
what thought is, possibly through attention? In that way,
thought may become proprioceptive. It will know what it is
doing and it will not create a mess. If I didn’t know what I
was doing when I made an outward physical action, everything

=== p. 76 ===

would go wrong. And clearly, when thought doesn’t know what
it is doing, then such a mess arises. So let us look further — first
at suspension, then at proprioception.
  I want to emphasize again that with anger, violence, fear —
with all those things, there can be suspension. If we suspend
anger, then we are going to see that anger has certain thoughts
and assumptions that keep it going. If you accept those assumptions, you will go on being angry. Or you could say, “I shouldn’t
be angry. I’m not angry, really.” Then you would lose awareness
of being angry while you remain angry. That would be suppressing awareness. You would still be violent. What is called for is
not suppressing the awareness of anger, nor suppressing nor
carrying out its manifestations, but rather, suspending them in
the middle at sort of an unstable point — as on a knife-edge —
so that you can look at the whole process. That is what is called
for.
   So the first point is: is it possible to suspend the action without
suppressing it? If you find it is not possible, then you observe the
process of suppression without suppressing the suppression — without
telling yourself you’re not suppressing. In addition, you may
find that there is an observer who is suspending the action.
Then you observe the suspension — you observe that there is an
effort to suspend the action. The point is, there is no formula for
this. I am not suggesting a formula or a prescription, but a point
of departure for an inquiry. We cannot tell exactly where it is
going to lead. You will perhaps find that you can’t stop this
thing rolling. But then you will find that there is some other
thing you are doing, and at a certain stage somehow that can
be suspended. At that point you will find you can look.
   Another approach could be that you get an outburst of anger
and it cools down. It simmers down, but it’s still there. You put
it in abeyance because something more important comes up,
but the anger is still there, ready to come up. You can then call
it up on purpose by trying to find the words that express the
reason for being angry. You can go over the thoughts that actually come to you. Then when you have a thought that carries
great force — somebody has frightened you or hurt you, and
you say, “I’m hurt” — watch what happens. This is much harder
than watching a thought which carries lesser force.
   What is behind the hurt is a previous thought which says,
“Tm not hurt, I’m feeling pretty good.” It all depends on certain

=== p. 77 ===

kinds of things: “My friends must think of me in a certain way;
this must be this way (and so on), and then I can feel fairly
good.” That’s in the background. It’s not conscious, but it’s
there. And then somebody says, “You're an idiot. You’re no
good at all.” This new thought comes in which produces an
opposite, bad feeling, and there’s a shock. At first you don’t
know what it is. Watch that. The content of the thought behind
it is, “What in the world has happened?” You’ll begin to see
that this is very habitual. Your explanation is that you’ve been
hurt. That explanation is duly displayed as pain. Since it’s
supremely important, the pain is very great. That all happens
in a flash — the machinery has been set up, and it explodes. If
you can’t watch it in the moment that it actually happens, you
can watch it afterwards — you can recall it. Recall it by the
words:   go over   the words   which   hurt   you,   and   see   what
happened.
   You will find that the words which first hurt you will hurt
you again. You can see how that comes about. You will find all
sorts of subsidiary thoughts like, “I trusted him and he betrayed
me.” Or, “I gave him everything and look what he does.” There
are a million such thoughts. The thing to do is to find the words
which express what’s going on, and see what those words do —
not for the purpose of finding the content of the words, but for
the purpose of seeing what they do. There is a difference
between thinking about the hurt, and thinking the hurt. Thinking
about the hurt is saying that the hurt is “out there,” and I
form abstractions about it, like a table. Therefore, I’m not doing
anything, because the hurt isn’t like a table — it’s me. The other
way is to think the hurt, which is to go through the thought and
let it produce whatever it’s going to do, which means to let it
stand in the body and in consciousness without being suppressed and without being carried out. Suspend the activity in
both directions, and just simply let it reveal itself, and see it.
   Now, in order to get a clearer picture of the meaning of
proprioception, I'll first discuss coherence, incoherence, and the
tacit process of thought. Incoherence means that your intentions
and your results do not agree. Your action is not in agreement
with what you expect. You have contradiction, confusion, and
you have self-deception in order to cover it up. Some incoherence is inevitable, because knowledge is not perfect. All knowledge is limited, because it is an abstraction from the whole. It

=== p. 78 ===

consists only of what you have learned up to this point. As
knowledge is always limited in this way, it is going to have the
possibility of being incoherent. The incoherence shows up when
knowledge is applied, when you act according to knowledge.
Or it can show up when you try to work something out through |
knowledge. If your attitude is a proper one, you say, “Okay. I
acknowledge the incoherence. I will let go of my past knowledge. Let me find out.” You find out what is wrong and change
it. But if you defend that knowledge, you are off on a wrong
track. There is no reason to defend knowledge, but people are
caught up all the time in defending it.
  On the other hand, we sense coherence as order, beauty, harmony. But if somebody only looks at order, beauty, and
harmony, he could easily start fooling himself and say that
everything is working nicely — it’s all orderly, harmonious, and
beautiful. So we need the “negative” sense of incoherence —
which is the road to coherence. If a person is sensitive to incoherence, he begins acknowledging it, and then finding out what its
source is. Coherence is evidently of tremendous value to us. It
has to be, because incoherent functioning is really very dangerous. In addition, we are built so that we somehow appreciate
coherence. It is part of life. If your life is totally incoherent, you
might feel that it is hardly worthwhile. So we have a sense of
value built in, but our values have become mixed up. As
thought developed over the ages, it produced incoherent values
which muddle us. For instance, if we have a desire for coherence
we can go about it wrongly and simply try to impose coherence, rather than discovering the incoherence and dropping it.
This is a kind of violence, and therefore a further extension of
incoherence.
   I suggest that the movement toward coherence is innate, but
our thought has muddled it. A highly incoherent response is on
the program in memory. We don’t know how to get at it or
what it means — and it has become more and more entangled
as time has gone on. Coherence includes the entire process of
the mind — which includes the tacit processes of thought. Therefore, any change that really counts has to take place in the tacit,
concrete process of thought itself. It cannot take place only in
abstract thought.
  This tacit, concrete process is actual knowledge, and it may
be coherent or not. In the case of riding a bicycle, if you don’t

=== p. 79 ===

know how to ride, then the knowledge isn’t right — the tacit
knowledge is not coherent in the context of trying to ride the
bike, and you don’t get the intended result. The incoherence
becomes clear — you fall when you want to ride. Physically, tacit
knowledge is where the action is coming from. And physical
change depends on changing the tacit response.
   Therefore, changing the abstract thought is one step, but
unless it also changes the way the body responds, it won’t be
enough. Someone could say, “You're not doing it right. You’re
turning in the wrong direction. You should turn to the direction
you're falling, but your instinct is making you turn the other
way.” All of that would help, but eventually it has to come into
the tacit. You need the tacit knowledge which you get by actually
riding, and then you are sort of correcting the previous knowledge. There is a movement in that tacit knowledge, which is that
it is exploring possibilities. When tacit knowledge moves and
finds a result in the direction you have been aiming for, it then
continues — it goes in that direction some more. That’s the way
it learns, until you finally find yourself riding the bicycle. You
may be guided by the abstract map, but you need the tacit
knowledge as well.
   The question is: can we do this in thought as well as in bicycle
riding? I am proposing that thought - to think — is actually a
tacit process more subtle than riding the bicycle. The concrete
process of thinking is very tacit. At the actual level where thinking emerges in the tacit process, it is a movement. In principle,
that movement could be self-aware. I suggest that there is a
possibility for self-awareness of thought — that the concrete, real
process of the movement of thought could be self-aware, without bringing in a “self” who is aware of it.
   “Proprioception” is a technical term — you could also say
“self-perception of thought,” “self-awareness of thought,” or
“thought is aware of itself in action.” Whatever terms we use,
I am saying: thought should be able to perceive its own movement, be aware of its own movement. In the process of thought
there should be the awareness of that movement, of the intention
to think, and of the result which that thinking produces. By
being more attentive, we can be aware of how thought produces
a result outside ourselves. And then maybe we could also be
attentive to the results it produces within ourselves. Perhaps we
could even be immediately aware of how it affects perception.

=== p. 80 ===

   If you move your body, you are aware immediately that you
have moved it. It is not a kind of conscious cognizance, but
rather it’s almost unconscious. You know that you have moved
it, that. something else has not moved it. There is an awareness
between your impulse to act and the act itself.
   Physically when you make a move, you have to know
immediately what the result is, without thought, without thinking, so that there is no time-lag in the feedback. If it takes a
lot of time it won’t work. This is essential for survival. Thus,
proprioception is built into the physical movements of the body.
And it can be improved — athletes and dancers learn to make it
better — but it is not perfect in anybody, because for many of
your movements you are not aware of what you are doing. But
still it is there.
   What about thought? You have the impulse to think. Then
thought occurs, and all sorts of things happen — “felts” occur, the
body gets tense, and so on. But if you don’t see the connection, it
would be like the woman who thought someone else was hitting
her. She did something, and thought she didn’t do it — that
somebody else did it. To get that wrong is all the difference in
the world. As an example, suppose you see someone you don’t
like, and begin to think, “What a terrible person he is. I can’t
stomach him.” That thought might be almost automatic — you
don’t even put it in words. But you could get a pain in the
stomach. You might then say, “Something is wrong with my
stomach.” Your heart-rate may change, or other things may
happen. Emotions may arise as you think of that person who
hurt you and didn’t have any regard for you. You say, “Well, I
have deep gut feelings about this, which must really be valid.”
That's a failure of proprioception in thought.
  In this connection,   there is a device   that can measure   the
resistance of the skin, which shows changes according to your
emotional state. If somebody says something to you causing
you to react, two or three seconds later a needle jerks — it takes
that time for the impulse to work its way down from the brain
through the nervous system. You may not even notice you had
some sort of emotional reaction — although if you had a strong
one you will notice it — but it affects you either way. If it gets
strong enough to be noticed you will say, “I had a gut feeling.”
   Now, the person said something to you two or three seconds
ago, but you don’t see the connection. You don’t connect it, and

=== p. 81 ===

you say, “There is a deep gut feeling, which is a sign that I’m
justified in being angry.” You use the feeling to justify the anger,
 and you say, “Here is an independent gut feeling, which shows
that I’m perceiving something. It shows that my anger is right.”
Then those thoughts arouse more feeling, and so on and on.
Without proprioception, you cannot get this right.
   Later, you can figure it out and say, “I can see that it was my
thought that did it.” But by that time, everything is stirred up
and you can’t get it straight. Whereas if you had proprioception
of thought, you would immediately say, “Well, I had the impulse
to think, I thought something, and then came that feeling. It
was caused in that way, and therefore that is all it means.” But
if you get the feeling that it does not come from a thought, then
it will tacitly be taken to mean a direct perception of reality.
   I think that there is a natural potential for spontaneous
proprioception of thought. The mind may have proprioception
built in, the same way that the body has — in the tacit process
there is self-awareness. That may be the very nature of mind. But
it is very subtle. It has been inhibited; otherwise you would
say, “Okay, there’s a thought that builds up an image that’s
frightening, or uncomfortable. But since it’s just an image, it’s
not very important.” Instead you say, “I mustn’t think of that.”
Or you don’t even consider what’s happening — you just start
moving away. You can’t keep your mind on it. It jumps, attention goes to something else, or you forget. You constantly forget,
getting senses of anesthesia or dullness. The brain is producing
all that to prevent you from getting into that painful thought —
it is trying to protect you from what it regards as something
very bad.
   The essential thing is that the body process is a movement,
beginning with an impulse and going on to a result, and you
sense it as it develops. Now thought is also a movement -— if it is
a process, it is also a movement. But thought doesn’t treat itself
as a movement. It treats itself as truth — as just being there,
telling you the way things are. In principle the movement of
thought could be self-aware, except that all this muddle is going
on, so it can’t work. It’s like the lights of Las Vegas, which
prevent you from seeing the universe. You might think that
those lights are the most important thing in the world, because
they are so powerful and they fill your consciousness. But something very subtle may be far more important.

=== p. 82 ===

   In this respect, there is a further way we can look at this
which gives some insight: that is to look at thought as a system
of reflexes. A reflex means that when a certain thing happens,
something else happens automatically. We have a lot of reflexes,
and they can be conditioned. For instance, dogs have a reflex
that makes them salivate when they see food. Pavlov did an
experiment where he rang a bell while showing food to a dog.
He did this many times, and after a while the dog would
salivate without seeing food, just from hearing the bell. That is
the basic form of conditioning — to repeat something quite often.
You can see the conditioning of reflexes all the time — a great
deal of our routine learning consists in establishing conditioned
reflexes. When you learn to drive a car, you are trying to condition your reflexes so that they will be appropriate.
   Elementary thoughts may take the form of a series of reflexes.
If somebody asks you your name, you have an immediate
answer. It’s a reflex. With a more difficult question there’s a
way the mind searches in the memory for answers. A “searching
reflex” is set up - the mind searches the memory, finds an
answer that may seem to fit, and then that answer comes out
and you can see whether it fits or not. I suggest that this whole
system is a set of reflexes — that thought is a very subtle set of
reflexes which is potentially unlimited; you can add more and
more, and you can modify your reflexes. Even the whole logical
process, once it’s committed to memory, becomes a set of
reflexes. And that’s what I want to call “thought” — which
includes the emotions, the bodily state, the physical reaction,
and everything else.
   Thought, then, is part of a material process. It goes on in the
brain, the nervous system, the whole body - it’s all one system.
Thought can be conveyed by material processes such as radio
waves,   television, or writing. In talking, sound   goes out and
conveys thought. Within the body, thought is conveyed by nervous system signals; there is a code of some sort which we
don’t know too well. I’m saying that thought is a material
process — it has reflexes that just go on by themselves. If you
have an insight or perception that this is true, then this will
actually affect you. An insight or perception of truth may deeply
affect the material process, which includes all the reflexes. But
if we have merely intellectual or inferential knowledge of what
is going on, then it doesn’t touch this process deeply.

=== p. 83 ===

         SUSPENSION, THE BODY,,AND PROPRIOCEPTION

  Matter may be infinitely subtle. Science doesn’t know all
about it, and probably never will. But matter is not just mechanical. Therefore, it could respond to perception in very deep and
subtle ways which may be beyond what science could even
trace; there could be a change. That’s the notion: that insight or
perception will affect the whole thing. It not only affects the
inferential understanding, but it also affects the chemical level,
the tacit level —- everything.
   The point is that we have the possibility of insight. Suppose
we ask ourselves, “Do we have it as an insight that thought
is a material process, or that thought always participates in
perception?” If we have that insight, then that may remove
some   of the barriers. But our whole    set of reflexes, our tacit
knowledge, is against that. It says, “Thought is not a material
process.” Our first reflex is: “Thought is far beyond matter, or
separated from matter somehow. It has some spiritual truth
or significance.” This notion has been conditioned into us as a
reflex.
   Now, however, we’re saying that thought is a material process
and thought participates — which means the notion that thought
is only telling you what things are is not really a serious option.
If that comes as an insight, or if you get the insight that thought
is not proprioceptive but requires proprioception, then that could
begin to touch the synapses in the brain which hold those
reflexes.

