=== chunk: tully-1988-meaning-and-context/ch13-taylor-hermeneutics-of-conflict ===
title: The hermeneutics of conflict
source_pdf: docs/sources/tully-1988-meaning-and-context/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 232-242
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 218
plan_page_end: 228
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 218 ===

                                  13                    |
        The hermeneutics of conflict

                        Charles Taylor

Quentin Skinner has staked out an interesting and challenging position
in the field of political theory. It centres around his view of what it is
to give an account of the political theory of a given thinker or epoch.
But this is in turn connected with an arresting and in some ways
original conception of the bases of modern political thought, and indeed,
of modern civilization. Skinner has been able to explore this connection,
instead of just remaining in the realm of methodological generalities as
so many philosophers do, because he is also, in fact first and foremost,
an historian. He has been able, as it were, to work both sides of
the fence, methodological and historiographical, and this is what has
made his work exceptionally rich and suggestive.
   Of course, just because of this breadth and richness, a question can
arise about the unity of this work. Skinner’s theoretical reflections relate
to and partly arise from his actual practice as an historian, and as always
when this is so, an issue can arise about whether there are features of
this practice which are not fully captured by the theory. In taking up
some issues in Skinner’s methodological views, therefore, I may not be
questioning the practice, at least not in the same way and to the same
degree. Coming to grips with this practice in its full range would be an
eminently worthwhile endeavour. But it would be beyond my powers to
do justice to this in the short space I have at my disposal, if indeed |
could ever do it. Here I want to confine myself to raising some issues
about the methodology, starting in fact not from Skinner’s own statements,
but from the useful and concise summary that James Tully has offered.!
   In fact, I want to raise a set of related questions about Skinner’s
methodology which deeply puzzle me. They do so because I am still
confused and uncertain about the underlying matters that they address.

=== p. 219 ===

But I think that I am     not alone in this confusion, and therefore that
it's worthwhile trying to deal with them in this chapter. I have spoken
of a set of questions with a number of facets, or of directions of approach.
    The first approach could be put this way: where does the historian
stand in accounting for the thought of a given writer or epoch? Tully
formulates one of the basic tenets of Skinner’s method: to find the
‘historical’ meaning of a text, look for what one might call its ‘illocutionary
force’. Try that is, to see what the author was trying to accomplish in his
political context in writing it. Read the text as action in context.
    Now we need a language to talk about texts in this way. Skinner suggests
that we understand the context as a language of politics, one that in the
manner adumbrated by Wittgenstein, is woven into and helps constitute a
given political way of life, helping to define the limits of the acceptable,
the good and the bad, the obvious and the problematical. This can
perhaps be referred to in short as an ‘ideological context’, or ‘ideology’.
    The text-as-action can then be understood not only against the background of this context, but also as directly relating to it. What a writer
is striving to do in producing a text is reinforce or change his ideological
context, strengthen or weaken rival elements of it, preserve a certain form
of it intact against assault, or on the contrary give it a new twist or
direction. The motives for such action can be understood in relation to
the political battles of the epoch, and the importance of the text-as-action
can be measured by how it contributed to the outcome of these battles.
   The context of action is one of struggle. Political battles in history, which
from time to time tip over into military conflicts as Clausewitz reminds us,
are also always battles for the ‘hearts and minds’ of those who can affect the
outcome. In this latter theatre, the texts of political theory are weapons. The
pen becomes a sword, and indeed, a very powerful one, as Tully’s title avers.
   A persuasive picture, as far as it goes. Who of the great political
theorists was not concerned to combat some historical forces of their
day and further others? But it leaves one important set of questions
unaddressed: what is the truth value of the theories the texts expound?
The texts are seen as moves in an attempt to bend and shape the terms in
which people argue and justify themselves. They are attempts to manipulate
the terms of debate in which the political identity of a society is established
and continued.4 But they can be identified as such as independent of any
judgement of their truth or validity. Of course, the terms in dispute had to
be thought valid by the civilizations in which they were disputed. Otherwise
the battle would have no point. And it is quite likely that one of the reasons
for a writer to try to alter these terms is that he believes his revision to
have greater validity — although even this is not necessary: he may have
other motives for wanting to manipulate the language of debate. But it
doesn’t appear as though the historian need take a stand on this issue

=== p. 220 ===

in order to identify the manipulative intent of the text. The context
of struggle can be kept separate from the context of truth.
   Or can it? Is there an issue about where the historian stands, which
he cannot evade except at the cost of muddle? ! believe that there
is, and that the bracketing of the issue of truth is never successfully
achieved. The attempt to sidestep it just leads to a confused prejudging
of it; it always returns to haunt us. But I could be wrong about this,
and Skinner’s work could be one of the things which prove me wrong.
I am uncertain about all this: uncertain whether Skinner wants to bracket
the question of truth, and unclear, if he does, on what basis.
   Perhaps I can explore this issue usefully by trying to build the case that
this bracketing is impossible. I want to build it polemically, by looking at
some of the inadequate reasons which have justified it in the past.
   The first is the notorious belief of positivist social science, that one could
separate ‘facts’ and ‘values’. This positivist variant of value-freedom — very
different from Weber’s doctrine 5 — justified the historian or social scientist
in not taking a stand on the issues raised in the texts on the very simple
grounds that these were not issues of truth. The various combatants in
the ideological struggles of history took value positions. But values cainot
be arbitrated as to truth, and so the historian has no call to intervene. By
contrast, issues of historical explanation, of identifying the motives and
effects of historical action, raised questions of fact. The scientist does his
business of getting at the truth, and leaves the quite distinct issue of what is
right and good (on which he undoubtedly also has views) out of account.
   Now this doctrine has fewer friends today, and certainly Quentin
Skinner is not one of them. He has rather helped to show how inextricably
entwined the explanatory and the evaluative are in all languages of politics.
My point in evoking it is simpiy to show what follows from negating it.
Once you drop positivism, you lose any a priori grounds for situating your
own explanatory language on a different level from the language you are
trying to study and explain. The language in which I explain the politics
of the Middle Ages, the Renaissance, the French Revolution, is not of an
utterly different kind from the language of Aquinas, Machiavelli, Hobbes
or Hegel. These are all conceptual schemes which serve inseparably to
classify political realities, to describe them, explain them and evaluate them.
To the extent that they are different and uncombinable, they are rivals.
   So when we account for what a thinker was doing in writing his
text in terms which he would have found strange, which he would
no    sooner   understand   (if this were   possible)   than   repudiate,   we   are
involved in revision. We are ipso facto challenging his picture of things
and putting our own in its place. We are not bracketing the question of
truth, but taking a negative stand on that issue in relation to this thinker’s
work. Positivism was in deep conceptual confusion partly because it was

=== p. 221 ===

in fact profoundly revisionist in relation to the greater part of the history
of thought but in ways that it couldn’t ever understand or admit to itself.
   To admit this revisionism is to call to mind a brace of theories which
share much of the naturalist philosophical background of positivism, but
which have made much stronger explicit claims. ‘Materialist’ theories, like
Marxism (under one interpretation) and contemporary socio-biology, offer
another type of ground for separating the historian from the subject of
historiography. This is no wishy-washy pretence of neutrality, but the
claim to have got the language of politics right. These theories purport
to tell us what is really going on, what the real driving motives of
people have been, and hence the nature of the actions they performed
and the changes they brought about. Where historical languages deviate
from this picture, and offer an incompatible view of action, they are
just wrong, illusory, ‘ideological’. So theologies of the Reformation can
be understood as moves in a struggle over new forms of production,
and marriage codes can be understood as reflections of the evolutionary
success of pair-bonding among hominids in the Pleistocene.
   Of course, these particular theories are widely thought to be reductionist
and implausible. But the question arises whether any historian isn’t forced
to make claims which at least are of this kind, even though they will usually
be much less confident, sweeping and presumptuous. To write history is
surely to claim, at least implicitly, to have identified the level of description
of at least some significant action. And where this identification enters into
conflict with those of one’s subjects, one is inescapably challenging and
revising these latter. The difference between more cautious and sensitive
historiography and the ‘materialist’ theories above lies in their lack of a
priori, metaphysical assurance that the historian is on a different scientific
level from his subjects, in virtue of having found the ‘key’ to human action.
Here the last motive for segregation breaks down, and one is forced
to see the subject as a rival and potential interlocutor. | am revising
his language and redescribing his action, but I have to be aware of
how this move is inherently itself open to challenge, including from
a defender of something like his position. It is as relevant to my
enterprise to make clear where I stand as it is to expound where he stands.
   Against this background, I am puzzled by James Tully’s claim: “The question with which [Skinner] approaches his study is not “What is politically
true and right?” It is rather .. . “What counts as politically true or right,
or as grounds for testing political knowledge claims, in different ideologies
and contexts?”’¢ Of course, one can set out to address one of these questions
rather than the other. But I don’t see how you can hope to answer the second
without taking some stand, implicit or expressed, on the first. Tully calls the
focus on the second question ‘historical pragmatics’, and he believes that
Skinner’s work provides a justification of this direction of enquiry as an

=== p. 222 ===

yy)                             Charles Taylor

exclusive focus, bracketing the issue of truth or validity. But as he spells this
out, one begins to wonder whether it shouldn’t be seen in a different light.
  The justification is a thesis about the political ideas which have come
to dominate our western societies. The terms of modern political discourse
are in fact a precipitate of earlier battles, in which the protagonists
attempted to establish certain expressions as canonical, for understandable
reasons in terms of the political issue of their day. The dominant ideology
today centres on a conception of the state and of legitimate state power,
and makes crucial use of such key terms as ‘sovereignty’, ‘law’ and
‘rights’. Tully calls this outlook the ‘juridical ideology’. But this ideology
hasn’t arisen as a single coherent body of thought, following a single
consistent train of reasoning. Rather what we live with today is
   the unintended and unrecognized product of four hundred years
   of political thought and action. Each tactical manipulation of a
   convention within local ideological controversies, and each use
   of this as an artifice in parochial political struggles are shown,
   from the perspective of the present, to add in effect an element
   in the construction of the juridical form of political representation.”
It follows, Tully reasons, that our modern political outlooks ‘whether
juridical or humanist, lack rational foundations, and this is because we lack
a language, each convention of which has been independently grounded, in
terms of which we could:assess all the conventions of our ideologies’.®
   It isn’t clear whether this claim is meant in a narrow scope, to
apply just to the ideology of the present age, or whether the dominant
ideology of today is just being singled out as an example of what is
generally true of any age. Starting from Skinner’s thesis about the origin
of reigning ideologies (they are the outcome of conflicts over the terms of
political discourse), and adding some more plausible premises about most
periods in history (they are the scene of a number of related conflicts, and
the outcomes of these has a high component of unintended consequences),
we generate the expectation that most ages will have a dominant ideology
consisting of rather heteroclite elements.
   I’m not sure what the reasoning is here, whether it is meant to follow from
the fact that a political outlook is a compound of disparate origin that it is
without rational foundation. This consequence doesn’t seem to hold. To see
this, imagine what an ardent supporter of modern liberal democracy could
say when we tell him that the elements which make up his outlook are of
very different origins. We explain to him that the notion of rights stems from
the late Middle Ages, with its rather special legal ideas and distribution of
power. He learns that Magna Charta was the instrument of a class of greedy
and oppressive magnates, that the ideology of universal-suffrage democracy
would have seemed like subversive madness to them, and the utilitarian

=== p. 223 ===

                          The hermeneutics of conflict                         2a3
premise that government ought to maximize happiness and minimize pain
despicable if not incomprehensible. After the initial separation trauma from
the edifying platitudes of his high school civics course, he could surely
construct for us a justification that made sense to him today of the way of life
in which all these figure as elements. The fact that it wouldn’t be the same
as the one that appealed to the barons at Runnymede, nor the one which
enthused officers of the New Model Army, nor what Robespierre or even
perhaps Jefferson thought, wouldn’t have to worry him. As a matter of fact,
it is not even excluded that one could construct a single unified justification,
from one coherent theory of philosophical anthropology, even though
historically we all know that liberal democracy didn’t arise that way.
   This being so, perhaps we should understand that basic argument in
another way. Perhaps the basic claim is that just because dominant ideologies are decided by the outcome of conflicts, it will generally be the case
that they are only randomly related to what is true or valid in relation to the
needs of the people who live under them. I have put this thesis in the broad
form, because only in this form would it justify our bracketing the issue of
truth. If we held a thesis of this kind just about our contemporary outlook, it
would be inseparable from a plea to revise it to bring it more in line with the
truth. But if one held that in general, ideas rise and fall as a result of struggles
in which their truth plays little or no deciding role, then one could argue that
the historical explanation of their fate could indeed be separated from judge-ments as to their validity, for it involves factors of a very different kind.
   Now Tully seems to be suggesting something of this kind in the third
thesis which he attributes to Skinner, which he dubs ‘the primacy of war’:
‘Effectual changes in European political thought and action are the consequences of war and secondarily the outcome of the ideological response to
the legitimation crises engendered by the shifting power relations that give
way to battle.’? It follows from this that, however political theorists conceptualize their activity, it ‘is unavoidably caught up and etched into more fundamental political relations that are relations of war.’!° And Tully invokes
Clausewitz here, whose dictum is reversed while being adapted: instead of
seeing war as a continuation of politics, we see theory as a phase of war.
   Now if this is the argument, we can begin to understand why it might
seem plausible to bracket off the issue of truth. After all, no one expects
the outcome of armed clashes in history to bear a close relation to any of
the other basic standards of valuation we cherish. Certainly not to right and
justice. We all know that we are lucky that Hitler over-extended himself,
and we in the west are lucky that we didn’t have to be delivered from Hitler
by Stalin. So why should truth be on the side of the big batallions either?
   Is this neo-Clausewitzian thesis Skinner’s? I’m not sure it is. If so, one
could certainly see how he might hope to insulate questions of historical
explanation from those of truth. But this kind of thesis, to the effect that

=== p. 224 ===

the arbiter of ideas is a kind of power which is no respecter of truth, is
in fact a radical one, and has far-reaching consequences. Tully’s invocation
of Clausewitz puts one in mind of Foucault, a theorist whom Tully sees
as moving along the same lines as Skinner. And Foucault in turn puts us
in mind of Nietzsche, and another quite different way of bracketing the
question of truth, quite unlike either positivism or classical materialism.
Nietzsche in some of his writings wanted to present the will to truth itself as
a manifestation of the will to power. And Foucault has drawn on Nietzsche
to develop his notion of ‘regimes of truth’, established within relations
of power, and between which there is presumably no rational arbitration.
   I am not sure whether Nietzsche really did bracket the question of
truth, as Foucault tried to do. I am even less sure whether, if he did,
the attempt is ultimately coherent. But I haven’t got space to go into
these issues here.!! I want rather to make a few remarks about a slightly
easier question: whether this neo-Clausewitzian thesis is at all plausible.
   In a sense we might see it as the antithesis of Hegelianism, at least
as vulgarly understood. Where Hegel seems to be saying that the real
is the rational, and that truth will eventually bring about its own
realization, the view I’m calling neo-Clausewitzian holds that it is without
effect, and that what happens is quite unrelated to it. The first view is
rightly discredited today. But is the second any more plausible?
   In a sense I am coming around to my basic puzzlement from a
different line of approach. I started off asking: where does the historian
stand? Can he avoid taking a stand on the truth of the ideas he is
examining? I have been arguing that a language of political explanation is
on all fours with the historical theories it is called on to explain, that they
are potential rivals, and thus that certain explanations are inseparable, from
affirmations or negations of what we are explaining. We need some special
plea to put ourselves on a different level from our subjects. Marxism offers
one such: the theorist finally has ‘science’. Now neo-Clausewitzianism
offers another: the relevant factors in explaining how ideas become
prevalent or die away have nothing to do with truth.
   But this brings us to another puzzlement, about the language of
explanation which is being offered. On one level, the thesis sounds
very plausible. Different languages, and different variants of traditionally recognized languages, are in competition. Their protagonists are in
struggle. But there is no single focus, the struggle is carried on in a
multitude of different contexts on a great many levels, through the
history of a society. The reigning language of any epoch is the provisional
outcome of this multi-layered struggle as it stands at that moment.
   As a general thesis it sounds undeniable. And to flesh it out with military
metaphors sounds quite unexceptionable. But then a crucial ambiguity
comes to light. Is the military language just metaphorical? Or does it

=== p. 225 ===

rather betoken that actual armed struggle, and the political structures and
disciplines which have been built to wage or deter armed struggle, are the
paradigm contexts in which the issue is decided? Tully interprets Skinner
in this second way; and he explains his use of military language thereby.
    But this is a much less plausible thesis. As much as the first interpretation
is easy to accept, even approaching a truism, the second is highly dubious
and questionable.
    Let us take one component of the ‘juridical ideology’ as an example.
The modern age developed the notion of sovereignty, and foundational
to liberal democracy is the view, also generated out of early modern
developments, that this sovereignty ultimately resides in the people. The
seventeenth century adds the crucial extension, that the people themselves,
as a collective body, are to be seen as constituted by the consent of
individuals. This notion, which was expressed in terms of social contract
theories, survives today even when some of the quasi-historical beliefs
which accompanied it have gone, and even though the contract is no
longer invoked in disputes about legitimation. Its continuing importance
can readily be seen in the great impact of post-Kantian theories of the social
contract as an ‘as if’ construction, most notably in our day with Rawls.
    Now I am far from being able to offer a detailed account, but it seems
to me very likely that this strength of political individualism — the notion
that rights pertain to individuals, and that the legitimacy of a system hangs
to a large degree on how it deals with individuals — is connected to the
saliency of individualism in other forms and other aspects of our culture.
That it is connected, for instance, with the rise of our modern conceptions
of marriage and the family, of human fulfilment in the companionate
marriage (or more latterly ‘relationship’), which have helped to make the
nuclear family or its surrogate the most important basic unit of social
life. That it is connected with post-Romantic notions of ‘fulfilment’, with
all the accompanying ideas of individual difference and the corresponding
crucial importance of being true to myself. It has become a banality that
it is connected with free-enterprise forms of capitalist entrepreneurship.
And the list could be continued.
   Now while it may seem plausible that the prevalence of political
individualism on its own be attributed to the fortunate outcome of
politico-military struggles in history — including some decisive armed
conflicts, such as the American Revolution and the Second World War, not
to speak of the dominance of imperial powers the political culture of which
was based on these values — it is much less obvious that the hold on us of the
reigning images of sexual love and personal fulfilment is to be explained in
the same terms. We can indeed speak of these emerging through a struggle.
But this has partly been the struggle of daily life, in which individuals and
couples strive to make sense of their lives and give shape to their hopes,

=== p. 226 ===

fears and aspirations. No one can underestimate the great impact that
war, conquest, mass migrations, expulsions, imposed industrialization, and
many other such founding events of modern civilization-have had. But these
condition and don’t displace the struggle to give form to one’s daily life.
   And while it is easy to believe, where the fate and prevalence of ideas is
decided in war, that this is only randomly related to their truth and validity,
it is a different proposition to hold that those self-interpretations which
emerge out of the daily struggle for self-understanding are quite unrelated
to their validity for us. To put it most simply, we may have to explain their
rise at least partly in terms of their fit with what we have become, rather
than explaining in the reverse direction, where what we become is a function
of the language which has been imposed on us by strategies of power.
   In short, only if we could show that relations of domination, and the
strategies which create and sustain them, have totally invaded the world of
everyday self-understanding could we adopt the narrow, neo-Clausewitzian
interpretation above, and make all dominant ideas the outcome of conflicts
which centre on war and the struggle for power. If we cannot, then the
neo-Clausewitzian thesis ceases even to be plausible for our political ideas,
granted the close interweaving between them and the other languages of our
culture. The reality of historical change would be a much more complicated
and messy business, in which the truth of ideas is neither decisive nor totally
irrelevant to their fate, since this truth would have very different weight in
different facets of what was nevertheless a single interconnected culture.
   I confess that this messy picture seems to me close to the reality of
things. But I recognize that Michel Foucault made a strong case for the
invasion of everyday understanding by relations of power. If this case could
be made good, then indeed, the neo-Clausewitzian perspective would appear
tremendously plausible. Tully is right, granted his interpretation of Skinner,
to relate him closely to Foucault. For Foucault provides the indispensable
philosophical underpinning for a Skinner who really wanted to go this route.
   But does Skinner really want to go this route? I am still uncertain. In a
sense, what I have been trying to do here is relate Skinner’s methodology
to a requirement that seems to me inescapable for any historian or social
scientist: confronting one’s own language of explanation with that of
one’s subjects’ self-understanding. The different avenues of questioning
I’ve explored here converge on this central demand. We can meet it
by asking what our language of explanation entails about the truth
of our subjects’ beliefs. Or we can get at the same issue via another
route by asking how we ought to describe their actions and thoughts.
   In the last few paragraphs I have been trying this second line of
approach. The challenge here as it relates to Skinner’s methodology could
be put in this way: telling us to identify what the author of a text is doing,
how he is intervening in the conflicts of his day, is not enough. We can’t

=== p. 227 ===

take it for granted that we already know how to do this for an age
sufficiently different from our own. Perhaps we need to learn more about
the kinds of conflicts there were, what was at stake in them, the kinds of
moves you could make, and what represented victory or defeat. The war
model seems to make things easy, because in one way this kind of extreme
conflict is understandable wherever we meet it in human history. We know
right away what it is to win and lose. Thus the operations of the European
state system from early modern times, in so far as this was concerned with
war, the preparations for war, the acquisition of the sinews of war, and
the like, seems readily comprehensible to us. We find our feet right away
in conflicts of this kind. We would have much more trouble understanding
the conflicts of the pre-twentieth-century Balinese state system. Thanks to
the penetrating and sensitive work of Clifford Geertz, we can get some sense
of what was at stake here.!? But we have a lot to learn — and specifically,
inter alia, from their self-descriptions — before we can find our feet here.
   Now the reference to Bali might be thought irrelevant in a discussion
of Skinner’s work. In fact, he has been concerned with the origins of
modern western thought, and it is precisely the European state system
which has played a major role in this. But the issue arises here in
another form. We are confident that we can understand the goals and
methods of a Richelieu, and in earlier centuries of a Medici or a Sforza.
But what is it to understand the conflict in which Luther, Eck, Zwingli
and Contarini were engaged? This is highly relevant to the modern age,
since however great the difficulty in formulating the connection exactly, we
are clearly in a number of ways the spiritual heirs of the Reformation.
   Now the conflict over the Reformation was central to the struggles
of the European state system in its formative period. And the actual
spread of the Reformation churches was obviously largely decided by
the balance of political and military forces. Would Luther have avoided
the fate of Hus without the Elector of Saxony? These centuries abound
with examples of the cynical use of power.
   But it doesn’t follow from this that the important place of the legacy
of the Reformation in our lives is to be explained in terms of the outcome
of the struggles, intrigues and strategies in the chancelleries of those times.
One modern idée force which I believe we owe to the Reformation is what
I call the affirmation of ordinary life, the belief that the central point
of human existence and human fulfilment is to be found in the life of
production and reproduction, or work and the family, or labour and
sexual love. In various forms this has been one of the great revolutionary
forces of modern culture. It gained this position as a result of struggle,
in some sense of this term. And one of the phases of this struggle was
the spiritual battle for hearts and minds of the sixteenth century. But |
think we still have some way to go before we understand the terms and

=== p. 228 ===

nature of this struggle. I don’t think that war-and the preparations for war
of the European state system even begin to give us the key.
   Now the demand I’ve been talking about, namely.that we confront
our language of explanation with the self-understanding of our subjects,
is nothing else but the thesis of hermeneutical theory. Tully at the end
of his paper wants to contrast Skinner’s approach with a hermeneutical
one. Skinner’s path runs parallel with hermeneutics for a long way, but
then he diverges where the hermeneutical theory falls into error. But the
error that Tully identifies here, namely ‘that it continues to encourage
and underwrite the view that the language [of the subjects themselves]
must be the best, and often the only guide to the activity it describes’,!3
is not part of contemporary hermeneutical theory, not at any rate since
Gadamer. That one must confront one’s language with that of one’s
subjects doesn’t involve accepting this language. It may of course. But
the upshot can also be that one judges oneself to have a perspective
that they couldn’t share, and so far forth revises their beliefs. The point
is the issue must be faced, one way or another, or muddle will prevail.
   We can all too easily be over-quick in concluding that we understand
what is going on in some distant place or century. And modern European
scientific thinking has a tendency to focus on and make primary just those
aspects of social life which seem closest to invariant across different
cultural contexts: war; the reproduction of the material means of life;
the conditions of ecological survival; the presence or absence of civil
strife. Perhaps the neo-Clausewitzian thesis is an exciting new insight,
but perhaps it is also another case where we cede to this old temptation.
   A number of questions arise from all this for Skinner’s methodology,
to some of which I might have the answers if I understood it better,
or had a better grasp of modern history. I am all too aware that
these questions represent largely stages of my incomprehension of the
tremendously rich and interesting body of work which Quentin Skinner
has been laying out before us.

