=== chunk: tully-1988-meaning-and-context/ch14-skinner-reply ===
title: A reply to my critics
source_pdf: docs/sources/tully-1988-meaning-and-context/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 245-302
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 231
plan_page_end: 288
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 231 ===

                   A reply to my critics
                         Ouentin Skinner

                      INTRODUCTION:        FOR METHOD

I am not sure where to begin. Reading my critics, I am perplexed to
learn that I am at once an idealist, a materialist, a positivist, a relativist,
an antiquarian, an historicist, and a mere methodologist with nothing of
substance to say at all.! The last charge is mainly pressed by Minogue,
who declares in chapter 10 that any attempt to offer general prescriptions
about historical method is ‘so much waste of time’ (10:186). But Minogue
is not alone among my critics in suggesting that my theoretical writings
are completely superfluous. Gunnell complains that they have already
been discussed more extensively than is warranted, especially in view
of their futility as a guide to practice.2 Tarlton, and more recently
Levine, have similarly claimed that there is nothing at all in my essays
of the least practical value for political theorists or intellectual historians.3
   On reflection, this seems the right place to begin. It is certainly
unpardonable to waste one’s colleagues’ time. So it will be best to
start by investigating the grounds these scholars have given for objecting that
this is all I have done.
   One reason they offer is that so many different questions can legitimately
be asked by intellectual historians that general prescriptions are bound in
effect to function as straitjackets.4 Among contributors to the present
volume, Minogue puts forward this criticism in general terms (see 10:179 — 80,

=== p. 232 ===

185 — 87), while Femia concentrates on the fact:that my grotesquely mistaken
approach involves the arbitrary rejection of any study of the potentialities or
consequences of systems of thought (9:157, 171,173).
   Femia does not mince his words; but nor does he follow my arguments. I
have never denied the obvious fact that we can and do turn to major works
of moral and political philosophy for all sorts of reasons, some of which
may carry us far beyond the works themselves and the intellectual milieu
within which they were conceived. My own concern, however, has solely
been with the question of how best to approach such works if our aim
is, in Dunn’s luminous phrase, to recover their historical identity.> I have
exclusively been concerned, that is, with how we should proceed if we wish
to gain an understanding of the utterances that go to make up such texts,
and hence an understanding of what their authors may have been saying and
doing in issuing just those utterances. To put the point more polemically, I
have sought to argue that, if our aim is to acquire this kind of understanding,
we have no option but to adopt an historical and intertextual approach.
   It would be a relevant and devastating criticism if it could be shown —
as Deconstructionist critics claim to show — that this project embodies an
impossibility, since there is nothing determinate to recover and understand.
This objection I shall have to consider at a later point. But it can
hardly be a relevant criticism to observe that we may approach a
text with many other questions in mind besides the one I have singled
out. I do not arbitrarily exclude these other questions: I exclude them
on the grounds that they are unconnected with — and must not be
confused with — the hermeneutic enterprise in which I am alone interested.
   Even those who have understood the scope of my arguments have often
insisted that the precepts I put forward are, as Minogue remarks, probably
pernicious and at best unnecessary (10:185, 186, 188). Minogue himself
offers a number of different reasons for this discouraging conclusion. One is
that the recovery of meaning is not a proper subject for rules and precepts
at all. The claim he has in mind here is far stronger than the indisputable one
mentioned by several other commentators, including Tarcov in the present
volume: that even if we follow the best methodological precepts, we can
never hope by such means alone to turn ourselves into good historians.¢
(Tarcov seeks in chapter 11 to demonstrate that my own historical practice
illustrates this melancholy truth.) Minogue’s is the more radical contention
(echoed by Gunnell)’ that it is a mistake to suppose that philosophical reflections about the concepts of meaning and explanation have any bearing upon
the intellectual historian’s task of recovering the meaning and explaining the
occurrence of past utterances. As Minogue puts it, ‘there is remarkably little
that can profitably be said in general’ about such issues. The moral is that
‘an intellectual historian ought to be an epistemological naif’, remaining as far
as possible in a state of ‘pre-theoretical innocence’ (10:186 —7, 189).

=== p. 233 ===

    This position strikes me as self-defeatingly incoherent. The claim that
philosophical argument cannot give rise to any useful precepts about
historical method is itself a philosophical argument from which a strongly
legislative methodological precept is said to follow: namely, that we ought
to be ‘against method’. But even if we endorse the complete separation
between theory and practice enjoined by Gunnell and Minogue, it remains
a jolting non sequitur to suppose that we can hope to remain in a state
of pre-theoretical innocence simply by treating philosophical ignorance as
bliss. The result of doing so will inevitably be to condemn ourselves to
making unselfconscious use of whatever intellectual tools may happen
to be lying around in our environment. Why this should be thought
preferable to engaging in self-conscious reflection about the nature of
those tools and their suitability for the kinds of tasks we want to perform
is something these epistemological anarchists never pause to explain.
    It is true that this response does nothing to establish the positive
value of connecting theory and practice in the manner I propose. But
I can see no other way of doing this than by offering up to Minogue
and his ilk the whole of the rest of this reply. In the course of it I shall
try to defend a series of philosophical arguments about interpretation, to
show how these can be couched in the form of precepts about method
and to suggest how these can in turn serve to provide us with a
helpful guide to practice. By my fruits I must ask to be judged.
    A number of my critics have given a second and contrasting reason for
supposing that the precepts I put forward amount (in Minogue’s phrase)
to nothing more than excess baggage (10:193). Minogue himself raises this
further doubt, even though this introduces an obvious inconsistency into
his argument. If, as he puts it, we think of an intelligent student
pondering the problems of interpretation in his own way, we shall
find that ‘there doesn’t seem much to teach him’ (10:183, 184). (So there was
something to know?) As Levine similarly suggests, there are of course general
rules of good interpretative procedure, but ‘the ordinary historian’ already
knows and practises them.®
   There is one version of this criticism I feel perfectly willing and indeed
anxious to endorse. As Levine, Wootton and several others of my critics
have stressed, there has never been anything particularly novel about my
arguments on historical method.? I am far from supposing otherwise. My
first essays owed an obvious debt to the theoretical writings of Pocock!°
and Dunn,!! and a still deeper debt to the approach embodied in Laslett’s
scholarship on the history of political thought.!2 One way of describing
my original essays would be to say that I merely tried to identify and
restate in more abstract terms the assumptions on which Pocock’s and
especially Laslett’s scholarship seemed to me to be based.'3 I was further
aided in this task, moreover, by the philosophical writings of J. L. Austin

=== p. 234 ===

 and, even more immediately, of R. G. Collingwood. To the latter, indeed,
 I am directly indebted for what remains my fundamental assumption as
 an intellectual historian: that the history of thought should be viewed
 not as a series of attempts to answer a canonical set of questions, but
 as a sequence of episodes in which the questions as well as the answers
 have frequently changed.!4 I hope I have never sought to minimize
 these intellectual debts, and I am happy to acknowledge them once more.
    I should add that in this present reply I am still more conscious of
 standing on the shoulders of others. I have learnt so much in recent years
 from those with whom I have discussed the problems of interpretation!’
 that I doubt whether my views about how to formulate the issues are truly
 my own, still less my views about the issues themselves. It is even probable
 that I have unwittingly borrowed some turns of phrase from those to
 whom I am most indebted. But this merely underlines the obvious fact
 that I am not trying to claim any novelty for the remarks that follow. The
 most I want to claim for them is that they are (so far as I can see) true.
    I confess myself less happy with a second version of the same criticism.
‘Doubtless it is the universal fate of those with the temerity to write about
 historical method to find their conclusions dismissed as obvious where
 they are not dismissed as false. But to claim as Levine has done that
 I merely inform ‘ordinary historians’ of what they already know seems
 to me insensitive to the character of the intellectual milieu into which I
 originally launched my bromides. When I published the essay reprinted
here as chapter 2, I was surely able to show, if nothing else, that a number
of historians were practising their craft in violation of what I proposed as
canons of good historical method. I am not denying that I may have been
wrong to propose those canons, and that the historians I criticized may well
have been right to ignore them. I am only observing that my proposals were
far from universally embodied at the time in ordinary historical practice.
   In any case, it has never been my intention simply to offer what Levine
calls ‘a method for doing the history of ideas’.1° As I have indicated, my
aim has been to articulate some general arguments about the process of
interpretation itself, and to draw from them a series of what I take to be
methodological implications. As a result, I have been forced to confront,
however ineptly, a number of central issues in the theory of meaning and
the logic of explanation. And these issues are surely worth considering
at any point, regardlesss of whether the implications I seek to draw
from them happen to be in or out of favour with practising historians.17
   Minogue at least recognizes that, in spite of my ‘desperately methodological idiom’, I am ‘really a philosophical imperialist in historical disguise’
(10:180). But this leads him to yet a further reason for concluding that my
precepts about historical method are worse than useless. What if the philosophical theory from which they are drawn should itself prove untenable?

=== p. 235 ===

The trusting but luckless historian would then be sunk. Better off, Minogue
concludes, without incurring such dangerous dependence (10:187).
   | agree that this is the heart of the matter. It is true that Minogue himself
makes no serious attempt to show that my views about interpretation are in
fact constructed out of philosophically faulty materials. But most of the contributors to the present volume have gone for the jugular by concentrating
on just that point. I think it may be said without undue oversimplification
that in doing so they have focused on two main difficulties. One concerns
the relationship between explaining beliefs and assessing their rationality or
truth. The other relates to my understanding of the theory of meaning and
speech-acts. No one could be more conscious than I am that, if I now try to
address these issues, I shall at once find myself out of my depth, not waving
but drowning. However, there can be no doubt that these are the issues most
worth addressing. So there seems no alternative but to take the plunge.
   Before I jump, however, I should like to add one last word in my own
defence. This is that, in one important respect, the severely limited nature
of the following remarks is deliberate. I have tried so far as possible to
avoid repeating anything I have already said. I do not think I have actually
contradicted any of my earlier arguments. But I have certainly rephrased and
extended them in many ways. It is true that several of my critics have already
deplored my willingness to introduce what Boucher calls equivocations and
changes of emphasis.!8 But I do not see that this propensity need be the cause
of any confusions or difficulties. If there is anything in the following remarks
which does in fact conflict with anything I have already said, I should
like what follows to be taken as the statement of what I actually believe.

               ON DESCRIBING       AND   EXPLAINING     BELIEFS

   Though words be the signs we have of one another’s opinions
   and intentions; yet, because the equivocation of them is so frequent
   according to the diversity of contexture, and of the company wherewith they go (which the presence of him that speaketh, our sight of
   his actions, and conjecture of his intentions, must help to discharge us
   of): it must be extreme hard to find out the opinions and meanings of
   those men that are gone from us long ago, and have left us no other
   signification thereof but their books; which cannot possibly be understood without history enough to discover those aforementioned
   circumstances, and also without great prudence to observe them.
                                   Thomas Hobbes, The Elements of Law

=== p. 236 ===

                                       I

I turn first to consider the relationship between the explanation of beliefs
and the assessment of their rationality and truth. Among contributors to
the present volume, these problems are raised most acutely by Charles
Taylor in chapter 13. Should an historian try to avoid ‘taking a stand
on the truth of the ideas’ he or she is examining? (13:224). Is it desirable, or
even possible, ‘to insulate questions of historical explanation from those of
truth’? (13:223). Taylor, like Shapiro,’ rightly observes that I have failed
to make clear what view I take about this question of ‘bracketing’ truth, and
they both ask me to explain myself.
   I am not altogether clear what Taylor means when he speaks about
‘bracketing’ truth (e.g. 13:220). Sometimes he seems to be asking whether an
historian should somehow seek to discount or set aside the fact that he or she
holds certain beliefs to be true and others false. If this is Taylor’s question,
then my answer is that I am sure no historian can ever hope to perform such
an act of forgetting, and that in any case it would be most unwise to try.
   Consider the fact that so great a political philosopher as Jean Bodin
believed there to be witches in league with the devil.2° Or the fact that so
great an empirical scientist as Aristotle believed that bodies change quality
whenever they change place.?! Living in the late twentieth century, we are
likely to feel, and unlikely to be able to repress the feeling, that these
claims are simply false. But we are also likely to find our interest
quickened by the discovery that such-eminent authorities, capable of
saying so many things that seem straightforwardly true, were also capable
of entertaining such apparent absurdities. If we begin by focusing on such
beliefs, we shall provide ourselves with the best possible starting-point for
investigating the structure of Aristotle’s or Bodin’s thought. For here at
least we come upon something that cries out to be explained. We shall
also provide ourselves with the best possible means of ensuring that our
eventual explanation takes a sympathetic and non-anachronistic form.
For whatever account we provide will have to include an explanation
of the fact that such admittedly bizarre beliefs nevertheless commended
themselves to such unquestionably distinguished minds.22
   At other points, however, Taylor seems to be asking a different
question: whether the views that historians take about the truth-value
of the beliefs they expound ought to affect the types of explanation
they give of them (13:219). My answer is that this depends on what
is meant by speaking about the truth-value of beliefs, a topic on which
Taylor writes in an ambiguous way.
   Sometimes the issue he raises is whether our explanations ought to
vary — or are bound to vary — with our sense of whether the beliefs we

=== p. 237 ===

                            A reply to my critics                        Dear!

are investigating are ‘true or valid in relation to the needs of the people
who live under them’ (13:223, cf. also 226). This question — seemingly
inspired by Gadamer — appears to me to embody an unhelpfully wide,
even metaphorical, extension of the concept of a true belief. But if this
is the issue on which I am asked to comment, then my answer is that
of course I agree that our explanations are bound to vary with whatever
judgements we make about truth in this extended sense. If we encounter
an ideology which we find to be true to the needs of the society living
under it, we are sure to treat that very fact as part of the explanation
for its success. If we come upon an ideology which is demonstrably
untrue in this extended sense, we shall certainly be obliged to explain
its success in a very different way. (But unless we find that the society
in question is on the point of dissolution, we are surely more likely
to conclude that we cannot hope to explain such a phenomenon at all.)
   At most points, however, Taylor speaks about true beliefs in a more
familiar and restricted way. When he asks whether we should take account
of the fact that a particular belief is true when seeking to explain it, what
he generally seems to be asking is whether we should take account of the
fact that the belief in question accords with our own best current beliefs
about the matter at issue. I am not of course (nor is Taylor) offering this
as a definition of truth. | am only observing, uncontentiously I hope, that
this is how we generally use the term.23 (Though the moral of this, as
Davidson has suggested, may well be that we ought not to ask for a
definition.)24 I take it, accordingly, that the question with which Taylor is
principally occupied is this: whether we as historians can or ought to avoid
asking ourselves whether we endorse the beliefs we are seeking to explain.
   Taylor himself maintains that it is undesirable and probably impossible to
bracket truth in this way (13:220). This conclusion aligns him with a considerable number of recent writers on social explanation, including Jarvie,
Lukes, MacIntyre, Newton-Smith and especially Macdonald and Pettit.?5
It also aligns him with several other critics of my own work, including
Graham, Shapiro, and Hollis in chapter 7 of the present volume.?¢
   When Taylor states his grounds for this judgement, however, he
remains deliberately tentative. He explores a number of reasons given
by positivist philosophers for supposing that the issue of truth can be
bracketed, and seems to me to dispose of these without difficulty. But
he makes no mention of the arguments put forward by the philosophers
I have just cited for supposing that the question of truth must always
be raised. Instead he emphasizes that he remains puzzled and uncertain
about the issue, and ‘could be wrong’ about it altogether (13:218, 220).
   Perhaps the best way to proceed will accordingly be to attempt a more
direct confrontation of the issue. Among the philosophers I have mentioned,
two main reasons have been given for supposing that the question of truth

=== p. 238 ===

can never be bracketed. One argument, stressed in particular by Macdonald
and Pettit, derives from Davidson’s theory of radical interpretation.2” The
suggestion is that, unless we begin by assuming that the holding of true
beliefs constitutes the norm among the people we are studying, we shall
find ourselves unable to identify what they believe. If too many of their
beliefs prove to be false, our capacity to give an account of the subject
matter of those beliefs will begin to be undermined. And once this begins
to happen, we shall find ourselves unable even to describe what we hope
to explain. The implication, as Davidson himself puts it, is that ‘if we
want to understand others, we must count them right in most matters’.28
   I cannot see that this view of radical interpretation possesses the relevance
for historians that some of Davidson’s more enthusiastic followers, such
as Macdonald and Pettit, have supposed. Davidson is merely proposing a
general strategy for using assertions to get at underlying beliefs, the strategy
of beginning by assuming general agreement. It may well be that we need
to start with some such assumption if we are to find another culture
intelligible. If | am to identify the nature of Bodin’s beliefs about witches,
or even to establish that they are beliefs about that particular subject matter,
it certainly seems plausible to assume that Bodin and I must share a considerable number of ancillary beliefs.(It is in any case clear that the beliefs we
share with our Renaissance ancestors are literally infinite in number.) But it
hardly follows from this (nor do I imagine that Davidson thinks it does) that
I need to assume that Bodin’s beliefs specifically about witches are mainly
true before I can be sure of identifying them as beliefs about witches. It
may be that practically everything Bodin says about that particular topic is
false. But by learning his language (an easily recognizable form of French)
and by seeing what concepts he uses and how he reasons with them, I can
nevertheless hope to identify without much difficulty where he is talking
about witches and what he thinks about them. It is true that, if 1am to keep
up with his arguments, it may be necessary for him to reassure me at various
points that he is still talking about witches. As long as he continues to make
it clear that this is so, however, there seems no reason to fear that I may suddenly feel obliged to conclude that he must be talking about something else,
even if practically everything he is saying strikes me as patently absurd.”
   I turn to the second reason often given for supposing that the issue of
truth must never be bracketed. False beliefs, it is said, point to failures
of reasoning, and failures of reasoning require additional explanations of
a kind not needed in the case of true beliefs. This appears, for example,
to be the thought underlying Graham’s contention that we shall be
acting ‘in a spirit of ill-judged humility’ as historians if we          fail to
consider the points at which the social beliefs we investigate are ‘flawed
or inadequate’.*° A similar thought clearly underlies Lukes’ discussion of
the special explanatory problems he takes to arise in connection with the

=== p. 239 ===

need to ‘identify the mechanisms that prevent men from seeing the falsity’
of their beliefs.3! Finally, the same commitment clearly emerges from
Macdonald and Pettit’s more extended analysis of the way in which
judgements about truth and falsity are bound to enter into ‘the kind of
explanation one gives’ of alien beliefs.32 When a belief under investigation
proves to be true, they assert, no further explanation seems to be required.
But when a belief is ‘manifestly false’ or ‘obviously incorrect’ there is
something further to be explained. We need in particular to consider
the kinds of ‘social function or psychological pressure’ that could have
prevented the agent in question from recognizing ‘the mistaken nature
of the belief’ .33
   If this is the argument on which I am asked to comment, then my
response is that I think it fatal to introduce the question of truth into
social explanation in this way. To do so is to assume that, whenever
an historian encounters a belief which he or she judges to be false, the
explanatory problem must always be that of accounting for a lapse of
rationality.3+ But this is to equate the holding of rational beliefs with
the holding of beliefs that the historian judges to be true. And this
is to exclude the obvious possibility that, even in the case of beliefs
that nowadays strike us as manifestly false, there may have been good
grounds for holding them true in earlier historical periods.
   Having gestured at the concept of rationality, I ought to stress that I
intend nothing very grand or precise by that much-abused term.35 When
I speak of agents holding rational beliefs, | mean only that their beliefs
(what they hold to be true) should be suitable beliefs for them to hold
true in the circumstances in which they find themselves. A rational belief
will thus be one that an agent has attained by some accredited process of
reasoning. Such a process will in turn be one that, according to prevailing
norms of epistemic rationality, may be said to give the agent good
grounds for supposing (as opposed to merely desiring or hoping) that
the belief in question is true.3¢ A rational agent will thus be someone
who, as Lewis puts it, believes what he or she ought to believe.37
   None of this implies that rational agents need to hold any particular
beliefs, save for those which may be indispensable to bare survival.3®
So this means in effect that a rational agent will be someone whose
beliefs are held in the light of a certain attitude towards the process
of belief-formation itself.
   This attitude must certainly include an interest in consistency. Rational
agents want their reasons for holding their beliefs to bear upon their
truth. But to espouse a given belief as well as its contradictory is
to hold at least one belief that must be false. A rational agent will
thus be concerned, at least in seriously troubling cases, to identify and
eliminate any such obvious inconsistencies.

=== p. 240 ===

   Above all, rational agents must be interested in the justification of
their beliefs.39 They must be concerned with the kinds of coherence,
and where appropriate the kinds of evidence, that give them grounds
for concluding that their affirmations of belief can in fact be justified.
They will thus be concerned, at least to some degree, to view their
own beliefs critically, to consider whether they really can be justified by
considering the degree to which they may be said to fit with each other
and with their perceptual experiences.
   It seems difficult to go further. In particular, it seems positively
erroneous to try to arrive at a single criterion, and hence a method,
for discriminating rational beliefs. The relations between the ideal of
rationality and the practices that may be said to manifest it seem far
too complex and open-ended to be captured in the form of an algorithm.
   It is true that recent epistemology has been much concerned to discover
such procedures or sets of rules. Among positivist philosophers, this at
first gave rise to the proposed test of verifiability. But this seems much
too strict. Apart from other difficulties, it provides the historian with a
potentially anachronistic — and in any case a far from perspicuous —
notion of direct observational evidence as the basis for justifying beliefs.
This in turn appears to overlook the fact that it may be rational
to hold a given belief, even in the absence of any such evidence,
as long as it can be plausibly inferred from other rationally held beliefs.4°
   The enemies of positivism later proposed an alternative criterion, that
of falsifiability. But this seems even less satisfactory. As I have suggested, it
appears a minimal characterization of rational agents to say that the reasons
they give for their beliefs should be reasons for holding them to be true. But
on the one hand, the fact that a given hypothesis may have resisted attempts
to falsify it scarcely gives us any grounds for supposing it to be true.*! And on
the other hand, the application of such a test has the effect of excluding as
irrational a number of otherwise well confirmed and well justified beliefs.42
   This, then, is as much as it seems appropriate to try to say about
rationality in general terms. I now turn to explain why it seems to me fatal
to satisfactory social explanations to exclude the possibility of holding a
false belief in a wholly rational way. My reason is an obvious and familiar
one. It is simply that the kinds of explanations we offer for beliefs we judge
to be rationally held are of a different order from the kinds of explanations
we feel obliged to offer if we once come to doubt whether a given belief
is held in a rational way. To equate the holding of false beliefs with
lapses of rationality is thus to foreclose, in advance of knowing whether
this is appropriate, on one type of explanation at the expense of another.
    This is not to claim — as Hollis does in this volume — that rational
 belief is its own explanation (7:140, 144). One problem with this thesis
is that it overlooks the gap between demonstrating the rationality of a

=== p. 241 ===

belief and explaining why it was held. Even if we can show that it was
rational for a particular agent to accept a certain belief, the explanation
of why he or she accepted it may always be independent of that fact.43
Hollis’s formulation also conveys the impression that, once a given belief is
exhibited as rational, there will be nothing further to explain. It is certainly
true that we find the phenomenon of rational belief less puzzling than
blatant lapses from rationality. But therein lies the danger. For it remains
true that the attainment of rationality will always be an achievement. So
an enquiry into the conditions that enable us to attain that state will never
be any the less legitimate — and may in some cases be no less necessary —
than an enquiry into the conditions that may prevent us from attaining it.
   Nor am | claiming — as Hollis, MacIntyre and others have done —
that the forms of explanation appropriate to rational and irrational belief
must differ because ‘rational belief cannot be explained in causal terms’.44
I see no reason to doubt that, if there is a sufficient reason for an agent
to accept a given belief, this may function as a cause of its acceptance.
I agree, that is, with the proponents of the so-called ‘strong programme’
that it seems appropriate to adopt what Bloor has called a requirement of
impartiality in the explanation of beliefs, a requirement that they should
all be approached and explained in the same causal terms.*5 But I see
no reason to suppose, as the exponents of the strong programme have
added, that this requirement is incompatible with making judgements
about rationality.4¢ To insist on the relevance of such judgements is not to
deny that we ought to be looking for causal explanations of the capacity
to achieve rationality no less than of failures to achieve it.
   When | insist on the need to ask whether a given belief is or is not rational
as a preliminary to explaining it, my reason is rather that the different cases
raise explanatory puzzles of different kinds. Even if we assume that our
explanations will in each case be causal in form, the causes of someone’s
following what are taken to be the relevant norms of reasoning will
nevertheless be of a different order from the causes of their violating them.
It follows that, unless we begin by enquiring into the rationality of the belief
concerned, we cannot be sure of correctly identifying what it is that needs
explaining, nor in consequence of directing our investigations along appropriate lines. If the belief proves to be one that it was rational for the agent
to have held, we shall need to investigate the conditions of that achievement.
If it was less than rational or palpably absurd to have held it, we shall need
to enquire into the very different sorts of conditions that may have inhibited
or prevented the agent from following accepted canons of evidence and
argument, or perhaps supplied the agent with a motive for defying them.47
   To reject this line of argument, as the advocates of the strong programme
have done, it is necessary to insist not merely on a requirement of
impartiality in the explanation of beliefs, but also on what Bloor has called

=== p. 242 ===

a requirement of symmetry.4% This further principle, as Barnes expounds
it, claims that we must reject any contention to the effect that one belief
can be stigmatized as more ‘ideological’ than another in consequence of
being in some way ‘unsatisfactory’ or insufficiently grounded.4? We have
to recognize that all our beliefs are socially caused in such a way that,
to some degree, their objects remain masked from us. It follows that
all of them must be approached and explained in one and the same way.
   If this is nothing more than a stipulation about how we ought to
use the term ‘ideological’, then perhaps it will do no harm. But if
it is a proposal about how we ought to set about the business of
explaining beliefs, then it seems to me fatal for just the reasons I have
sought to give. It deprives us of an indispensable means of identifying the
most appropriate lines of enquiry to follow in any given case.
   It may be helpful to offer an illustration of what I mean by speaking of
the fatal consequences of failing to ask in this way about the rationality of
beliefs. Consider the influential explanation of witchcraft beliefs offered by
Le Roy Ladurie in his classic study, The Peasants of Languedoc.‘° Ladurie
starts by stressing that such beliefs are of course manifestly false, a mere
product of ‘mass delirium’.5! He proceeds to infer that they could never
have been rationally held. As he explicitly asserts, those who espoused
them were simply ‘slipping savagely into the irrational in belief and
behaviour’.52 The effect of this commitment is to direct Ladurie’s attention
as an historian in one particular way. He assumes that what he must be
looking for is an explanation of a breakdown in normal reasoning, a
situation in which ‘the peasant consciousness suddenly broke loose from
its moorings’.°3 The question, as he puts it, is how to account for such
an upsurge of obscurantism, such an epidemic of pathological beliefs.54
   Part of Ladurie’s answer is that, with the progress of the Reformation,
the peasantry began to fear a loss of their traditional spiritual help. ‘Far
from their priests, the peasants found themselves alone with their anxieties
and their primordial fears — and abandoned themselves to Satan.’55 But his
main hypothesis is that they felt a deep sense of frustration at the collapse
of the social upheavals associated with the Reformation. With the failure
of social reform, their continuing desire to improve their lot took on a
‘mythical dress’, being forced to express itself in the ‘chimerical and fantastic
revolt of the witches’ Sabbath, an attempt at demonic forms of escape’.56
   I am not concerned with Ladurie’s actual explanations, although it
hardly seems an incidental consequence of his approach that they turn
out to be so dizzyingly speculative. I am solely concerned with the fact
that, by treating it as self-evident that a certain set of beliefs could
never be rationally held, Ladurie leaves himself no space to consider a
quite different sort of explanation. He cannot allow that the peasants
may have believed in the existence of witches as a result of holding

=== p. 243 ===

a number of other beliefs from which that particular conclusion might
reasonably have been held to follow.
   To consider only the simplest possibility, suppose that the peasants
held the belief — widely accepted as rational and indeed indubitable in
sixteenth-century Europe — that the Bible constitutes the directly inspired
word   of God.   If this was   indeed   one   of their beliefs, and if it was
rational for them to hold it, then it would have been the height of
irrationality for them to have disbelieved in the existence of witches.
For the Bible not only affirms that witches exist, but also that witchcraft
is an abomination and that witches must not be suffered to live.57 To
announce one’s disbelief in the existence of witches would thus have been
to announce a doubt about the credibility of God’s word. And what could
have been more dangerously irrational than that?58
   Ladurie excludes in advance the possibility that those who believed
in witches may have done so as a result of following out some such
recognizable chain of reasoning. But this means that he not only puts
forward an explanation of witchcraft beliefs which, for all he knows, may
be completely irrelevant; it also means that he bypasses a range of questions
about the mental world of the peasants which it may be indispensable
to answer if their beliefs and behaviour are to be properly understood.
   A common objection to the above line of argument has been that it
presupposes an excessively objectivist conception of rationality. Disciples
of the later Wittgenstein such as Peter Winch, as well as exponents of
the strong programme such as Barnes and Bloor, have all converged on
this point. As Barnes puts it, echoing and endorsing Peter Winch’s case,
to claim that we can assess and criticize the rationality of beliefs is to
presuppose ‘external standards’ of rationality of an ‘objective’ kind.°? But
we have no access to any such ‘super-cultural norm’, and in consequence
no prospect of being able to ‘discriminate existing belief-systems or their
components into rational and irrational groups’.6? The very idea of
assessing the rationality of beliefs is thus dismissed as nothing better than
an intrusion, a forcible imposition of our own epistemic standards on an
alien ‘universe of discourse’ or ‘form of life’.
   This objection is I think totally misconceived. But my reason for saying
so is not that I imagine — as Hollis does — that we can hope to vindicate
a substantial and objective conception of reason and employ it in the
assessment of beliefs.®! It is rather that the abandonment of any such project
does not preclude the idea of assessing beliefs for their rationality. If an
historian stigmatizes the upholding of a particular belief within a particular
society as irrational, this judgement need never flow from the application of
an allegedly objective conception of what can or cannot properly count as
rationality. The historian need only be claiming that he or she has uncovered
the prevailing norms for the acquisition and justification of beliefs in that

=== p. 244 ===

particular society, and that the belief in question appears to have been
upheld in the face of, rather than in the light of, those norms themselves.
The historian need only be claiming, that is, that the agent in question fell
short of — or perhaps abandoned, manipulated or in some other way deliberately defied — some generally accepted standard of epistemic rationality.
   If historians were to adopt this approach, they would be engaging
in the assessment of beliefs in just the manner I have recommended.
But at no point would they be applying an ‘external’ standard of
rationality in an intrusive way. They would not be asking themselves
whether the belief in question is rational according to their own standards
(still less the standards) of epistemic rationality. They would merely be
reporting that it was not an appropriate belief for that particular agent
to have espoused in that particular society at that particular time.
   It might seem that this is bound to deprive the concept of any cutting
edge. This is certainly the inference drawn by Rorty, who assumes that
once we give up the idea of rationality as a concept ‘floating free of the
educational and institutional patterns of the day’, we shall have to admit
that we cannot hope to employ the notion in the assessment of beliefs.°2
We shall find that practically everyone is capable of putting their desires
and opinions together in such a way as to satisfy a purely pragmatist
test of rationality. So the idea of asking whether it was in fact rational
for them to hold their resulting beliefs becomes devoid of content.®3
   A number of intellectual historians have recently endorsed the same
viewpoint. Once we discover the inner coherence of a given system of beliefs,
they maintain, we can hardly fail to count it rational for the system to have
been upheld. So the project of assessing the rationality of individual beliefs
again drops out of sight. ‘If ways of thinking are recreated sympathetically,
then one never refutes but always sustains’ whatever beliefs are identified.®5
    I concede that accusations of irrationality must only be hurled in the last
ditch, if at all. We need to begin by recreating as sympathetically as possible
a sense of what was held to connect with what, and what was held to count
as a reason for what, among the people we are studying. Otherwise we are
sure to commit the characteristic sin of the ‘whig’ intellectual historian: that
of imputing incoherence or irrationality where we have merely failed to identify some local canon of rational acceptability. | cannot see, however, why
it should be supposed to follow that our interpretative charity must always
be boundless. On the contrary, there may be many cases in which, if we are
to identify what needs to be explained, it may be crucial to insist, of a given
belief, that it was less than rational for a given agent to have upheld it.
   As an illustration of what I have in mind, consider one of the
beliefs fundamental to Renaissance political philosophy, the belief that
the quality of virtu is indispensable to military and political success. It was
owing to their loss of this quality, Machiavelli particularly insists, that the

=== p. 245 ===

Florentines of his own age became so disastrously incapable of defending
themselves. In his earlier writings Machiavelli merely asserts this belief, but
in the course of his Florentine History he supports it with some dramatic
examples. Describing the battle of Anghiari, for instance, he notes that in
four hours of alleged combat only a single soldier was killed;®® describing
the even more farcical battle of Molinella, he adds that in the course of half
a day’s fighting there were no fatalities at all.67 By focusing on these and
similar cases, he builds up his evidence for saying that his fellow-countrymen
were abjectly lacking in the kind of virtd needed to preserve their liberty.
   If we turn to Machiavelli’s sources, however, we find that they hardly
support these conclusions at all. What they suggest is that a total of
seventy soldiers were killed and six hundred wounded at Anghiari, while
at Molinella there was fierce fighting and several hundred fatalities.°*. If we
turn, moreover, to later Renaissance discussions of the Florentine History,
we find a number of commentators complaining about Machiavelli’s
deliberate fabrication of his evidence. Scipio Ammirato, for example,
insists that Machiavelli gives no adequate grounds for his conclusions;
he simply ‘changes names and alters facts’ in such a way as to make
his authorities say what he already wants to believe.©?
   It is true that a sufficiently charitable historian could easily rescue
Machiavelli at this point. Machiavelli fervently believed that the quality of
virtu had been lost in the modern world. And he was not without strong
grounds for this belief. He also believed that a willingness to behave courageously was one of the most obvious characteristics of a virtuoso people.
But this means he could hardly fail to conclude that his fellow-countrymen
were lacking in courage. Nor could he readily interpret their military
conduct except in terms of their axiomatic lack of this virtuoso quality.
   As his own contemporaries insisted, however Machiavelli was only
able to maintain this particular article of faith at an extravagantly
high cost. He was obliged to falsify the relevant authorities, and in
consequence fell rather grievously short of the standards recognized by his
own peers for the assessment of evidence and the justification of beliefs.
As a number of them rightly observed, the outcome was a commitment
which it was not appropriate for Machiavelli to uphold, or at least
not in the unequivocal form in which he always upheld it. To put the
point in the jargon I have been using, it was not a rational belief.
   I have already emphasized why it matters to be able to make such
judgements. As soon as we permit ourselves such an uncharitable conclusion, we confront a new set of questions about Machiavelli’s beliefs,
a set of questions we had no occasion to ask or even notice as long as
we felt able to assume their rationality. Why is he so excessively insistent
on the military incompetence of his fellow-countrymen? Is he nursing some
private grievance? Or is he merely nostalgic for the bygone days of citizen

=== p. 246 ===

militias? Or is he unduly influenced by the classical assumption that such
forces are alone capable of displaying courage? These questions in turn
suggest wider ones. Should we be looking for a strongly emotional
component in others of Machiavelli’s political beliefs? Should we think
of him as habitually credulous in his response to the political writings
of ancient Rome? Only by enquiring into the rationality of his beliefs can
we hope to recognize the range of explanatory puzzles they actually pose.

                                      U

The above argument in response to Taylor can in turn be expressed in the
form of a set of maxims for historians concerned with the description and
explanation of beliefs. The golden rule is that, however bizarre the beliefs
we are studying may seem to be, we must try to make the agents who
accepted them appear (in Hollis’ phrase) to be as rational as possible.”°
   This golden rule in effect embodies three precepts. The first merely states
a condition sine qua non of the whole enterprise. We need to assume what
Lewis calls a convention of truthfulness among the people whose beliefs we
are seeking to explain.7! Our first task is obviously to identify what they
believe. But our only evidence of their beliefs will normally be contained in
whatever texts and other utterances they may happen to have left behind.
It is of course likely that some of these may be pervasively marked by
hidden codes such as irony. But we have no option but to assume that,
in general, they can be treated as straightforward expressions of belief.
Unless we can assume such a convention of truthfulness, we cannot hope
to make any headway with the project of explaining what they believed.
   The second and closely connected precept states that we must initially
be prepared to take whatever is said, however bizarre it may seem, as far
as possible at face value. If the people we are studying assert that there
are witches in league with the devil, we must begin by assuming that this
is exactly what they believe. This will not only serve to keep before us the
precise character of our explanatory task; it will also enable us to steer clear
of a familiar but condescending form of interpretative charity. It will prevent
us from purportedly rescuing the rationality of the people we are studying by
way of suggesting that, whenever they say something that strikes us as grossly absurd, it will be best to assume that the speech-act they were performing
must have been something other than that of stating or affirming a belief.
   There have been two widespread applications of this principle. One of
them, essentially Durkheimian in inspiration, suggests that we ought rather
to assume that such statements express in symbolic form a proposition
about the structure of the speaker’s society and his or her commitment
to upholding it. This version was until recently popular with a certain

=== p. 247 ===

school of social anthropologists, as the writings of Beattie, Leach and
others attest.72 The second, more Freudian in inspiration, suggests that
we ought instead to assume that such statements express in a displaced or
distorted form some deep and unacknowledged feelings, such as frustration
or anxiety. It is this version of the principle we have already encountered
in Ladurie’s account of witchcraft.
   The obvious difficulty with the principle in either form is that the
only criterion we are offered for distinguishing those propositions we are
to take literally from those we are to take symbolically is our own cognitive
discomfort. If we find it too embarrassing to take what is said literally,
we are in effect instructed to take it instead as a symbolic or displaced
way of saying something else. To reject this approach is not of course
to deny that beliefs may perform a crucial role in expressing a society’s
view of itself, its fears, its aspirations, its sense of solidarity. Nor is it to
deny that the Freudian approach in particular may be able to furnish us
with indispensable insights, unavailable to the agents themselves, into why
they may have held (and held on to) their particular beliefs. It is only to
assert that we shall be assuming what has to be established if we take it
that we can move directly to such forms of causal explanation in advance
of asking whether the agents in question may not in addition have had
good reasons, by their lights, for holding what they believed to be true.
   The third precept states the positive task to which we commit ourselves
as historians by virtue of this approach. We must seek to surround the
particular statement of belief in which we are interested with an intellectual
context that serves to lend adequate support to it. As we have seen, this
commits us to something more than trying to establish that the people we
are studying may have had good practical reasons for saying what they
said. It commits us to trying to establish that their utterances were not
merely the outcome of a rational policy, but were also consistent with
their sense of epistemic rationality. The primary task is therefore that
of trying to recover a particular context of presuppositions and other
beliefs, a context that serves to exhibit the utterance in which we
are interested as one that it was rational for that particular agent,
in those particular circumstances, to have held to be true.
   We cannot know in advance what range of beliefs this may require us to
investigate. So my proposal stands in contrast with one that has often been
put forward in particular by historians of science. They have sometimes
argued that, as Hesse puts it, we ought to concentrate on ‘the received
internal tradition’ of scientific discovery, and hence on the established
canon of major scientists, rather than trying to ‘spell out in tedious
detail every minor writing or trivial biography of forgotten figures’.7
   In criticizing this approach I am not questioning the appropriateness
of concentrating on the received tradition of discovery if that is what

=== p. 248 ===

historians of science happen to find most interesting. Rather I take it
that all forms of history are bound to be ‘whiggish’ in this sense. The
problems on which historians feel it worth expending thier energies will
be certain to reflect their own sense of intellectual priorities. It would
be strange indeed if they were to conduct their researches according
to a set of priorities they themselves felt to be mistaken.
   I am only insisting that, once we recognize that an understanding even
of a received canon of major figures requires us to surround them with
whatever intellectual context makes best sense of them, we cannot afford
to be too quick about dismissing any feature of that context as tedious or
irrelevant. To an historian of science, the details of the Anglican Church
hierarchy in Newton’s time may very probably appear in that light. But it
may well be that for Newton the isomorphism between such hierarchies
and those he found in the heavens gave him good reason, by his lights,
for believing in the truth of his celestial mechanics. To dismiss the first
as a ‘religious’ belief, with no relevance for Newton’s scientific studies,
may well be to impose such a deeply anachronistic sense of how to
divide up the world, and of what can count as a reason for what, as
to close off the possibility of understanding Newton’s most obviously
‘scientific’ achievements. Any impatience with what we think of as
irrelevance or triviality may cheat us of just the understanding we seek.74
   Philosophers sympathetic to this approach, such as Rorty, are apt to insist
that we can hope to state it a good deal more briskly than I have managed.
What it amounts to, they assure us in Wittgensteinian style, is simply that
we need to get into the swing of whatever exotic language-games are being
played by the people whose beliefs we are trying to describe and explain.75
This seems true but unhelpful. We surely need to ask about the most suitable
strategy for breaking in upon such unfamiliar activities and forms of life.
   As a first step, it will perhaps be best to recall that statements
of belief rarely present themselves individually to the historian with
evidence conveniently attached. As I have observed, the question of
what it is rational to believe in part depends on what else we believe.
Any particular belief in which an historian is interested will therefore
be likely to present itself holistically as part of a network of beliefs, a
network within which the various individual items supply each other with
mutual support. As I have already implied, it follows that if an historian
wishes, say, to discover whether it was rational for Bodin to believe in
witches, the soundest course of action will be to begin by asking whether
Bodin held any other beliefs in the light of which this admittedly bizarre
conclusion might in some way have appeared to make good sense.76
   Hollis objects that it will only be rational to hold such a belief if it was
in turn rational to hold the core beliefs from which it is said to follow.77
But this image of a rational bedrock strikes me as confused. What does it

=== p. 249 ===

mean for a purportedly core belief to be rationally held? On the one hand,
it can hardly mean that we are capable of giving good reasons for holding
it. For in that case it would still be a derivative rather than a core belief.
But on the other hand, I cannot see — as I have already conceded —
what else it can mean to describe a belief as being held in a rational way.
   I cannot see, in short, that Hollis’ proposal can be deployed in such a
way as to set limits to the kind of holism I am trying to expound. Even
in the most primitive perceptual cases, even in the face of the clearest
observational evidence, it will always be reckless to assert that there
are any beliefs we are certain to form, any judgements we are bound
to make, simply as a consequence of inspecting the allegedly brute facts.
The beliefs we form, the judgements we make, will always by mediated by
the concepts available to us for describing what we have observed.78 And
to employ a concept is always to appraise and classify our experience from
a particular perspective and in a particular way. What we experience and
report will accordingly be what is brought to our attention by the range of
concepts we possess and the nature of the discriminations they enable us
to make. We cannot hope to find any less winding a path from experience
to belief, from observational evidence to any one determinate judgement.7?
   Hollis retorts that, at least in the case of ‘simple everyday beliefs’,
the historian or ethnographer ‘needs to discover’ that the people he or
she is studying have ‘common perceptions, common ways of referring to
things perceived and a common notion of empirical truth’.8° If history
and ethnography are to be possible, he maintains, there must be a firm
bridgehead of shared experiences which are conceptualized in an invariant
way. He infers that there must be some corresponding terms in any
language for the expression of these bridgehead concepts, and he advises
the historian or ethnographer to begin by finding and translating them.*!
   Quite apart from the fact that Hollis’ principle still does not tell us
exactly where to look, it strikes me as a serious misconception to suppose
that we can ever hope, even in ‘simple perceptual situations’, to isolate and
describe ‘what a rational man cannot fail to believe’.82 Even the simplest
action or event can be fitted into a variety of more or less complex
classificatory schemes, and can in consequence be labelled in an indefinite
variety of ways. Consider, for example, a report of the simplest possible
kind of ‘perceptual situation’: a report, say, to the effect that it is raining.*$
When Roman writers stated this belief, they used the word imber, this being
the only term available in classical Latin to denote a fall or shower of rain.
This means that, if an ancient Roman and a modern Briton were to confront
this situation together, there might be many instances in which, faced with
exactly the same evidence, they might arrive at conflicting statements of
belief. If the Roman were to report that he was experiencing an imber, and if
the Briton were to take this to mean a fall or shower of rain, the latter might

=== p. 250 ===

actually dispute the judgement. The Briton might wish, for example, to insist
that what he or she was experiencing was nothing more than.a drizzle.
   This is not of course to deny the obvious fact that in some sense
the Roman and the Briton are experiencing and talking about the same
thing. It is only to insist that, whenever we report our beliefs, we
inevitably employ some particular classificatory scheme; and that, as Kuhn
has especially emphasized, the fact that different schemes divide the world
up in different ways means that none of them can ever be uncontentiously
employed to report indisputable facts.84 This is not to deny that there
are facts to be reported. It is only to insist — pace Hollis’ insistence
that there must be ‘a bridgehead of true assertions about a shared
reality’85 — that the concepts we employ to report the facts will always
serve at the same time to help determine what are to count as facts.
   In claiming that our concepts are not forced upon us by the world,
but represent what we bring to the world in order to understand it, I
may appear to be embracing a thesis of Idealism. But I do not mean
to deny the existence of a mind-independent world that furnishes us
with observational evidence as the basis of our empirical beliefs. | am
only arguing that, as Putnam has put it, there can be no observational
evidence which is not to some degree shaped by our concepts and
thus by the vocabulary we use to express them.8¢
  It is this consideration which, I must confess, seems to me somewhat
crassly ignored by such critics of my work as Graham and Shapiro. The
latter, for example, accuses me of failing to distinguish those concepts
which mask from those which truly reveal ‘what is actually going on’
in the social world.87 I can only repeat that it seems to me a gross
oversimplification to conceive of our social world as containing unequivocal
objects and states of affairs that an adequate system of signs can hope to
pick out in such a way that no sensitive observer can fail to see what is
actually going on. Any system of signs will serve to single out just those
objects and states of affairs which it in turn enables us to denote, while
other systems of signs will always be capable of performing that task
in different and potentially conflicting ways.
  One serious objection to this line of argument, however, has been that
it runs the danger of rendering the task of the historian or ethnographer
impossible. Keane insists in chapter 12 that I ‘overlook’ the fact that
‘historical interpretation is possible only through the mutual participation
of interpreter and interpreted in the medium of a common language’
(12:210). Turner raises a similar doubt,°®® while Hollis examines the
objection in considerable detail, not only in his criticisms of my own
work but also in a number of his other articles.89
   Hollis’ main contention is that, if we cannot ‘pair’ the terms used by alien
peoples with ‘counterparts’ in our own language, then we cannot embark

=== p. 251 ===

                              A reply to my critics                            vay
on the task of translating their utterances.9° But if we cannot be sure how to
translate what they say, we can never hope to identify what they believe.?!
For Hollis, as for many other philosophers of social science, translatability
is thus taken to be a condition of intelligibility, with the result that the
main issue is held to be that of establishing how translation is possible.92
   Sometimes this thesis has been stated in a form that makes it seem
straightforwardly false. Gunnell, for example, contends that ‘to learn a
new language is only possible because one already knows a language’.%3
If this were   true,   no   child   would   ever   be able   to   master   its own
mother tongue. But even in the form in which Hollis and others have
defended it — as a thesis about the need to be able to pair the basic
terms of alien languages with equivalents in our own — the claim that
intelligibility presupposes translatability strikes me as seriously overstated.
   To see why this is so, consider again the primitive example of a Roman
writer reporting the incidence of rain. Take, for instance, Tacitus’ account
in the Histories of Vespasian’s coup against Vitellius. Describing the onset
of fighting in Rome, Tacitus remarks that Vitellius’ troops failed to keep
a proper watch, especially after ‘the sudden outbreak of a winter imber
impeded their hearing and sight’.24 How are we to translate. imber? On
the one hand, the tone of the passage is notably sardonic, even by Tacitus’
standards. Is he suggesting that the Imperial troops allowed themselves to
be hampered by nothing more than a shower of sleet? On the other hand,
he admits that they found it difficult to hear. Is he conceding that their
cause was jeopardized by what we should describe as a real downpour?
  The answer is, I think, that there is no determinate way of translating
the passage at all. But it does not follow that this renders it unintelligible.
The fact that we cannot hope to pair imber with an equivalent English term
forms no barrier to our learning the denotation of imber and the use Tacitus
makes of it. It is true that, if we think in globally sceptical terms of trying
to do so in the absence of any particular contexts of its occurrence, then
perhaps we cannot hope to succeed. But this reason for concluding that we
may be cut off from the users of alien languages, though sometimes urged
in expositions of Quine’s theory of indeterminacy,” is I think likely to strike
a practising historian as a case of raising a false alarm. The term imber in
fact appears with some frequency in classical Latin in a highly determinate
range of contexts. Even if there were no Latin dictionaries, a sufficiently
learned and patient historian could, I think, hope in the end to establish
with some confidence how the term was generally used. Such an historian
might eventually be able to discover, that is, that Roman writers employed
it if and only if they wanted to refer to what a lexicographer would doubtless
call the phenomenon of atmospheric vapour falling in a condensed form.
   The assumption that intelligibility presupposes the capacity to pair
words and sentences in different languages seems in short to be a mistake.

=== p. 252 ===

There will often be no prospect of translating terms in an alien language
by means of anything approaching counterparts in our own. But this does
not prevent us from learning alien terms, and in consequence finding out
what discriminations they are used to make. If we can do this, we can
eventually hope to understand the applications even of those terms which
remain wholly resistant to translation. It is true that we can never hope
to tell someone what those terms ‘mean’ by citing synonyms in our own
language. The fact that translation is to this degree indeterminate seem to me
inescapable. But the moral of this, as Quine long ago taught, is perhaps that
we ought to give up the quest for ‘meanings’ in such an atomistic sense.?¢
   It is perhaps needless to add that I am not pleading for historians to
re-enact or re-create the experience of being a Roman historian, a Renaissance demonologist or any other such alien creature.” | am only pleading
for the historical task to be conceived as that of trying so far as possible
to think as they thought and to see things in their way. What this requires
is that we should recover the concepts they possessed, the distinctions they
drew and the chains of reasoning they followed in their attempts to make
sense of their world. What I cannot see, however, is why it should also be
thought to require us to to map their distinctions and the terms they used
for expressing them on to the distinctions and expressions we happen to
use ourselves. Historical understanding is a product of learning to follow
what Hacking has called different styles of reasoning; it is not necessarily
a matter of being able to translate those styles into less outlandish ones.?8
   Nothing in the above argument is intended to contradict Davidson’s
observation that the resources of a given language such as English seem
 adequate for dealing with even the most dramatic cases of purported
 incommensurability reported by writers like Whorf and Kuhn.9? As I have
emphasized in discussing the term imber, the fact that we cannot be sure of
translating it satisfactorily does not mean that we cannot hope to describe
its range of references by means of something approaching an adequate
English periphrasis. The only sense, therefore, in which I am defending the
thesis of incommensurability is an undramatic one. |am merely contending
that it will always be a mistake for an historian to assume that the
task of explicating an alien concept can be reduced to that of finding
a counterpart in his or her own language for the term that expresses it.
   This still strikes me, however, as a methodological precept of considerable
importance. To illustrate why this is so, let me revert to the example I
have already considered from Renaissance philosophy: that of the concept
of virt as employed by Machiavelli and his contemporaries. Seeking a
translation for this term, historians have begun by observing that, even
in Machiavelli, persons of courage and prudence are often described as
virtuosi. This leads to the conclusion that Machiavelli ‘sometimes uses
virtu in a traditional Christian sense’.!°0 But Machiavelli also describes

=== p. 253 ===

a number of talented but wicked men as virtuosi. This leads to the
suggestion that perhaps the term has in addition ‘a different meaning’,
signifying skill or ability in political or military affairs.101 As further
anomalous usages are uncovered, however, commentators have generally
come to the conclusion that the term appears to have no determinate
meaning at all. Rather it bears ‘a wide variety of meanings in the
writings of Machiavelli’, who uses it ‘in a great variety of senses’. !02
   As the example indicates, such historians have taken the task of
understanding the concept of virti to be that of explicating its ‘meanings’
by discovering their English counterparts. But the examples also indicates, |
hope, what is wrong with this approach. One outcome is that a different and
far more promising line of enquiry is automatically closed off. The historian
cannot consider the possibility that Machiavelli may have been using the
term with perfect consistency to express a concept so alien to our own moral
thought that we cannot hope nowadays to capture it except in the form of an
extended and rather approximate periphrasis. Perhaps, for example, he used
it if and only if he wished to refer to just those qualities, whether moral or
otherwise, that he took to be most conducive to military and political success. (As far as I can see, this is in fact the case.) A further and consequential
outcome is that a genuinely ‘whig? fallacy is almost automatically embraced.
Such historians begin with the assumption that, if Machiavelli’s use of virtua
refers to a clear concept, there must be some equivalent terms in English for
expressing it. But they soon find themselves disappointed in their quest. As
a result, it is all too easy to arrive at the completely unwarranted conclusion
that Machiavelli must have been confused, since he appears (as one
expert has put it) to be ‘innocent of any systematic use of the word’.!93
   It would be easy to multiply examples. (Consider, for instance, the
many ‘confusions’ that historians of philosophy have claimed to find
in discussions about causation prior to Hume.) But I hope the general
point needs no further emphasis. A term such as virti gains its ‘meaning’
from its place within an extensive network of beliefs, the filiations of
which must be fully traced if the place of any one element within the
structure is to be properly understood.!°4 Doubtless we can only hope
to embark on such a task if there is some considerable overlap between
our beliefs and the beliefs of those whom we are trying to investigate.
But this overlap may nevertheless be far too exiguous to allow for
anything approaching term-by-term translations of the concepts involved.
To suppose otherwise is not merely a philosophical error, but one that leads
to just the deleterious practical consequences I have tried to illustrate.
   Having reached this position, it is possible to suggest an answer to a
further and closely connected question that practising historians as well
as philosophers of history have repeatedly raised.'0° As Taylor puts it
in chapter 13, the question is whether we are ever justified in revising

=== p. 254 ===

the language of the people we are studying in such a way as to bring
our descriptions into conflict with those they offered themselves (13:221).
   There is one way in which it will obviously be legitimate to go beyond,
even if not to contest, the stock of descriptions available to the people we
are studying. This will be if we wish not merely to identify what they
believed but to comment on the place of those beliefs within some larger
historical pattern or narrative. Among recent philosophers of history, Danto
in particular has emphasized the asymmetries that are bound to result.1°¢
When Gibbon remarks, for example, that Boethius was the last Roman who
would have been recognizable as such by Cicero, he offers a comment on
Boethius’ beliefs to which Boethius himself could not possibly have assented.
We may nevertheless wish to insist that what Gibbon says of Boethius’
beliefs is true; it would be absurd to reject the description as misleading
simply because Boethius himself was in no position to recognize its truth.
   There is a further point at which it will often be legitimate not merely
to go beyond but to repudiate the descriptions offered by the people we are
studying. This will be when we are confident that we have identified what
they believe and wish to go on to explain why they believed it. It would
be a quixotic form of self-denying ordinance to insist that our language
of explanation must at this point match whatever language the people in
question applied or might have applied to themselves. If we wish to furnish
what we take to be the most powerful explanations available to us, we
are bound to employ what we believe to be the best available explanatory
theories and the concepts embodied in them. As a result, our vocabulary
of appraisal and explanation will be almost certain to include a number
of concepts that would have been incomprehensible to the people to whom
we apply them. These will certainly be cases in which — to comment on a
question raised by Taylor in one of his other articles — we shall want to
insist that, even if our resulting explanations conflict with those offered by
the people we are studying, ours must be regarded as the ‘superior’ ones. 107
This is to say no more than that one of our beliefs is that our stock of social
explanations has become enriched over the course of recent centuries.
   Some intellectual historians have wished to add a third type of case.
What matters, they have claimed, is not the terms in which people happen
to express their beliefs, but the nature of the distinctions they draw
by the use of those terms. This means that, as long as we preserve
their distinctions, it may be positively helpful to revise their terms. For
example, we may wish to say that, although Locke never uses the word
‘image’ in outlining his theory of ideas, we gain a clearer sense of what
he is talking about if we speak of ‘images’ where he speaks of ‘ideas’. !°°
   Although apparently unexceptionable, this proposal strikes me as treading on far more dangerous ground. The terms we substitute may well
perform the illuminating task of capturing more of the implications of

=== p. 255 ===

a theory than its own author may have recognized. But they will almost
certainly serve at the same time to import a number of irrelevant and
even anachronistic resonances. And as soon as this begins to happen, the
intellectual historian will be failing in what | take to be his or her primary
task: that of identifying and describing the beliefs to be explained.
  I incline to the conclusion, therefore, that where an historian is trying
to identify beliefs — as opposed to explaining or commenting on them —
it will generally be fatal to revise the terms in which they are expressed.
The beliefs in question will only be identifiable as having their precise
subject matter by virtue of the particular terms in which the agents
themselves express them. To revise those terms will in consequence be
to talk about a different set of beliefs.
   As an illustration of what I have in mind, let me end by reverting
once more to the case of Machiavelli, and specifically to the political
argument outlined in his Discourses. Historians have regularly discussed
Machiavelli’s theory in terms of its account of the relationship between
the rights and interests of individual citizens and the powers of the state. 109
But Machiavelli himself never employs the terminology of rights (diritti) or
interests (interessi) at any point. The effect of revising his vocabulary in this
way has thus been to supply him with a range of alleged beliefs about a
number of topics on which he never pronounced. It is of course possible
that he possessed the concept of a right even though he never talked about
rights. But as I began by stressing, historians have no option but to begin
by assuming that what people actually talk about provides us with the most
reliable guide to their beliefs. To begin by insisting that they must really
be talking about something else is surely to run the highest possible risk
of supplying them with beliefs instead of identifying what they believed.

                                       Ul

The way we live now is such that anyone who defends the type of
position I have outlined above is certain sooner or later to find themselves
denounced (or commended) as a relativist. Sure enough, my critics have
repeatedly thrown this piece of conceptual bric-a-brac at my head.
Graham speaks of my ‘conservative relativism’,!!° Hollis speaks in the
present volume even more disturbingly of ‘a vicious relativism’,!!! while
King and Shapiro both suggest that I ought at least to explain more
clearly why I think my position is not a relativist one.!!?
   Here goes. I have certainly relativized the idea of ‘holding true’ a given
belief. I have asserted that it may well have been rational for Bodin to hold
it true that there are witches in league with the devil, even if such beliefs no
longer strike us as rationally acceptable. But at no point have I endorsed the

=== p. 256 ===

thesis of conceptual relativism. I have never asserted that it was true that
at one time there were witches in league with the devil, even though such a
belief would nowadays strike us as false. To put the point generally, I have
merely observed that the question of what it may be rational to hold true can
vary with the totality of one’s beliefs. I have never put forward the reckless
and completely different thesis that truth itself can vary in the same way.
   I have certainly claimed that, when we say of a given belief that we
hold it true, what we are saying is that we find it acceptable. But this
is not to claim, as the conceptual relativist does, that there is nothing
more to truth than acceptability. Unlike the relativist, | am not trying
to offer a definition of truth at all. | am not in general talking about
truth; I am talking about what people at different times may have had
good reasons by their light for holding true, regardless of whether we
ourselves believe that what they held true was in fact the truth.
   I have not even suggested that the reasons people give for their beliefs
have to be such that an historian who recovers them need find them so
much as recognizable as reasons for holding true the beliefs concerned.
Historians frequently study what Hollis calls ritual beliefs, cases in which
the contents of the beliefs under investigation may remain unintelligible.!13
The most we can hope to do in such circumstances is to place the beliefs
in question within an appropriate explanatory context of other beliefs.114
We can certainly hope as a result to indicate why someone operating from
within that context might have come to assent to the propositions we
ourselves find unintelligible. But we cannot hope to do more. In such cases
we discharge our task as interpreters if we can explain why, say, Aquinas
believed that God is at once three persons and an indivisible Being.!15 We
need not suppose that we have to be able in addition to perform what may be
the impossible feat of explaining what exactly it was that Aquinas believed.
To paraphrase Hollis, the aim of the historian is to produce as much understanding as possible, a task not to be confused with producing converts.1!16
  I am convinced, in short, that the importance of truth for the kind of
historical enquiries | am considering has been exaggerated. I take this to
be a product of the fact that too much of the meta-historical discussion
has hinged around the analysis of scientific beliefs. In such cases the
question of truth may perhaps be of some interest. But in most of the
cases investigated by historians of ideas, the suggestion that we need to
consider the truth of the beliefs under examination is I think likely to
strike an historian as strange. Take for example one of the cases I
have already discussed: Machiavelli’s fervently held belief that mercenary
armies always jeopardize political liberty. Perhaps there is nothing to
stop us from asking whether this is true. But the effect of doing so
will be somewhat analogous to asking whether the king of France is
bald. The best answer seems to be that the question does not really arise.

=== p. 257 ===

   I am not of course adopting the position, sometimes ascribed to
Wittgenstein, that we are precluded from asking about the truth of
such beliefs on the ground that they can only be understood as part
of a form of life that may be ultimately no less cognitively justifiable
than our own.!!7 On the contrary, that way of stating the thesis of
conceptual relativism strikes me as self-refuting as it stands, embodying as
it does the statement of a preferred point of view while denying that any
such point of view can be attained.!!8 [ am merely insisting (to revert to
my example) that our task as historians is to try to recover Machiavelli’s
point of view; and that, in order to discharge this task, what we need
to employ is solely the concept of rational acceptability, not that of truth.
   Some historians have admittedly sought to reintroduce the question of
truth by arguing that their findings actually serve to underpin the thesis
of conceptual relativism. Kuhn has been widely if mistakenly interpreted
in this way, but the clearest positive statement of this claim has been
put forward by Barnes and Bloor. As we have seen, they think they
have established from their historical case-studies that all our beliefs have
social causes, and that all such causes operate in such a way as to distort
our capacity to get in touch with the objects of our beliefs. From this they
have inferred in their latest theoretical pronouncement that the only possible
judge of the truth of our beliefs must be whatever consensus over norms
and standards may happen to prevail in what they call our local culture.!19
   I cannot see that the generalization extracted by Barnes and Bloor from
their research bears on the thesis of conceptual relativism at all. Suppose
it is true that the social causation of our beliefs is such as to mask their
objects from us. The obvious inference is that we have no grounds for
holding those beliefs to be true, not that we have satisfactory grounds for
holding them to be true according to some relativized notion of truth.!2°
   By contrast with Barnes and Bloor, it seems to me that if the practice of
intellectual history serves to suggest any theoretical insights, these must be of
an anti-relativist kind. I infer this from the fact that the truth of conceptual
relativism and the practice of intellectual history appear to be incompatible.
  The point I have in mind here is again an obvious and familiar one. If we
are to use our ancestors’ utterances as a guide to identifying their underlying
beliefs, it is indispensable that we should hold in common with them a
number of assumptions at least about the process of belief-formation itself.
   The most basic of these assumptions — to which | have already alluded
— is the one stressed above all by Quine.!2! We must be able to assume, in
advance of our historical enquiries, that our ancestors shared at least some
of our beliefs about the importance of consistency and coherence. We must
be able, for example, to assume their acceptance of the principle that, if one
affirms the truth of a given proposition, then one cannot at the same time
affirm the truth of the denial of the proposition. !22 Beyond this, we also need

=== p. 258 ===

to share with our ancestors some assumptions about the process of using
our existing beliefs to arrive at others. Even if we can identify some of their
individual beliefs, we may still find our efforts at understanding defeated
unless we can make some fairly strong assumptions about the character of
the reasoning they must have employed in fitting their beliefs together.    174
   It can easily be made to look like pure dogmatism to insist on such
anti-relativist considerations in an a priori style. But the need to do so can
I think be readily vindicated if we simply recall the nature of the historian’s
task. The primary aim is to use our ancestors’ utterances as a guide to the
identification of their beliefs. But if they display no concern for consistency,
if they employ no recognizable modes of inference, then we shall have no
means of marking off which of their utterances are to be classed as instances
of the speech-acts of stating or affirming beliefs. If they are willing, for
example, both to affirm and deny the truth of some particular proposition,
then we can never hope to say what they believe about that proposition
at all. As a number of philosophers have insisted, following in Quine’s
wake, the idea of holding rational beliefs and the idea of holding beliefs
that are mainly true by our lights certainly come together at this point.!24
   This is not to assert that the idea of a ‘pre-logical mentality’ —
an idea ritually cited by philosophers in this context — is necessarily
an impossibility. (Although I confess that, for reasons emphasized by
Davidson, I cannot see how such a people could in fact have any beliefs.) It
is only to assert that, if an historian were really to encounter a people for
whom it caused no discomfort to affirm and deny the same propositions,
there would be no prospect of reporting what they believed. Nor am I
denying that historians may well encounter abnormal forms of discourse
in which the law of non-contradiction is deliberately flouted. I am only
saying that such forms of discourse must be abnormal, and parasitic on
recognizable forms, if we are to understand the linguistic community in
which they take place. Nor am I even denying that agents engaged
in normal discourse may turn out to have a number of beliefs about
their beliefs which, strictly speaking, reveal inconsistencies.!25 I am only
saying that an historian will be unable to grasp the content of any beliefs
that turn out to be contradictory in and of themselves.
   These conclusions can also be stated in the form of a further methodological precept. If as historians we come upon contradictory beliefs, we
should start by assuming that we must in some way have misunderstood
or mistranslated some of the propositions by which they are expressed.
   As a simple instance of what I have in mind, consider yet a further example from Machiavelli’s political works. In his Discourses Machiavelli affirms
that liberty is possible only under a repubblica.'26 But he also affirms that
Rome lived in liberta under her early kings.!27 What then does he believe?
Does he or does he not think that liberty and monarchy are incompatible?

=== p. 259 ===

    Historians have tended to reply that he seems to be confused: he
accepts but also denies that liberty is only possible under a republic.!28 |
am suggesting, however, that before we endorse such a conclusion we ought
first to consider whether we may not in some way have misunderstood what
he said. Sure enough, if we investigate the full range of contexts in which the
term repubblica occurs, we discover that in Machiavelli the term is used to
denote any form of government under which the laws may be said to foster
the common good. It follows that for Machiavelli the question of whether
a monarchy can be a repubblica is not an empty paradox, as it would be
for us, but a deep question of statecraft. The question is whether kings can
ever by relied upon to pass only such laws as will serve the common good.
This gives us an alternative reading: Machiavelli is telling us that, under
Romulus and his successors, the laws of Rome served the common good,
so that the government, although monarchical in form, was an instance
of a repubblica. Since this has the effect of resolving the contradiction,
I am suggesting that this is also the interpretation we ought to prefer.
    But what if the initial contradiction had refused to yield to any such
re-interpretative efforts? I have already given my answer: at that point we
have to admit that we cannot say what Machiavelli believed at all. It is
true that some intellectual historians, especially followers of Leo Strauss,
have taken this to be naive. They have instructed us instead to treat such
apparent contradictions as clues to the presence of some esoteric doctrine
still to be elicited. But I have already tried, in the article reprinted in this
volume as chapter 2, to explain why this does not seem to me a very
sensible way to proceed. Admittedly I can now see, re-reading my own
argument, why it has struck certain admirers of Strauss, such as Tarcov, as
less than completely decisive. But it hardly seems appropriate to restate my
views at greater length, if only because this aspect of Strauss’s writings has
by now been so thoroughly discredited. I am content to end by reiterating
the point of substance: that to treat all interpretations as failures unless they
yield complete intelligibility is to adopt an unduly optimistic view of what
we can hope to bring back with us from the foreign lands of the past.

                     ON MEANING       AND   SPEECH-ACTS

  I should hate to find myself in agreement with the kind of critic
  who denies the poet supreme authority regarding his work — seeing
  nothing in his explanation of a poem, for example, but an attempt to
  limit its suggestiveness — and for this reason I should contend that if
  an author has read a passage fiercely, ironically, humorously, sadly,

=== p. 260 ===

  then for ever after to read it softly, idealistically, seriously and gaily
  will be a smart bit of wrong-headedness, like Hamlet in space dress.
                                          Philip Larkin, Required Writing

Despite the scepticism voiced by a number of my critics, I persist in
believing that Austin’s analysis of speech-acts provides us with a convenient
way of making a point of fundamental importance about the understanding
of utterances and hence the interpretation of texts. The theory reminds us
that, if we wish to understand any serious utterance, we need to be able
to grasp something over and above the sense and reference of the terms
used to express it. To cite Austin’s own formula, we need in addition
to find a means of recovering what the agent may have been doimg in
saying what was said, and hence of understanding what the agent may
have meant by issuing an utterance with just that sense and reference.!2?
   The idea that speech is also action, that to say something is always and eo
ipso to do something, had of course been emphasized by many philosophers
of language before Austin. The central insight is most economically
conveyed by Wittgenstein’s remark that ‘words are also deeds’.!3° But the
abiding value of Austin’s formulation lies in the fact that he furnished a
means of speaking precisely about the two separable dimensions of language
— for they are nothing less than that — which we need to consider if we wish
to understand   serious utterances.!31   The interpreter must of course turn
first to the dimension on which I have so far concentrated, the dimension
conventionally described by speaking about the meanings of words and
sentences. But what the interpreter also needs to grasp, in Austin’s
admirable formulation, is the particular force with which a given utterance
(with a given meaning) may have been issued on a particular occasion.     !32
   Austin tried further to clarify his point by introducing a neologism
to distinguish the precise sense of ‘the use of language’ in which he was
principally interested. He stressed that, in speaking about the force of an
utterance, he was pointing to what an agent may have been doing in saying
what was said. He sought to distinguish this dimension from another whole
range of things we may be doing in using words. This further range incorporates the things we may succeed in bringing about (whether intentionally
or otherwise) as a result of speaking with a certain force. To separate the
question of what we may be doing in saying something from what we
may bring about by saying something, Austin proposed that we speak of
the illocutionary as opposed to the perlocutionary force of utterances.133
   To illustrate the refinements Austin was thus able to introduce into
Wittgenstein’s suggested analysis of ‘meaning’ in terms of ‘the use of words’,

=== p. 261 ===

consider the following dummy example. (I take it directly from my discussion in chapter 4, since I can think of no quicker way to make clear what is
at stake.) A policeman sees a skater on a pond and says ‘The ice over there
is very thin’. The policeman says something and the words mean something.
To understand the episode, we obviously need to know the meaning of the
words. But we also need to know what the policeman was doing in saying
what he (or she) said. For example, the policeman may have been warning
the skater; the utterance may have been issued on the given occasion with
the (illocutionary) force of warning. Finally, the policeman may at the
same time have succeeded in bringing about some further (perlocutionary)
consequences by saying what was said. For example, he may have succeeded in persuading or frightening or perhaps merely amusing the skater.
   Austin’s chief aim was to clarify the idea of ‘the use of language’ in
communication. So he placed his main emphasis on the fact that speakers are
able to exploit the dimension of illocutionary force in order — as the title of
his lectures puts it — to do things with words. As a result, he had rather little
to say about the nature of the relationship between the linguistic dimension
of illocutionary force and the capacity of speakers to exploit that dimension
in order to perform the range of speech-acts — and especially illocutionary
acts — in the classification of which Austin was principally interested.
   I take it, however, that the right way to think about this relationship
is to focus on the fact that, as Austin always stressed, to speak with
a certain illocutionary force is normally to perform an act of a certain
kind, to engage in a piece of deliberate and voluntary behaviour. As
this suggests, what serves to connect the illocutionary dimension of
language with the performance of illocutionary acts must be — as with
all voluntary acts — the intentions of the agent concerned.
   Consider again the speech-act of warning someone. To perform that
particular act, we must not only issue a particular utterance with the
form and force of a warning. We must at the same time mean or intend
the utterance as a warning and mean it to be taken as a warning by
way of its being recognized as an instance of just that intentional act.
As Austin put it with his customary exactitude, to recover the intended
illocutionary force of a given utterance, and thus the nature of the
illocutionary act performed by the agent in saying what was said, what
we need to understand is the way in which the given utterance, on the
given occasion, ‘ought to have been taken’.!34
   It is true that Austin himself wavered on this point. When he first
introduced the concept of an illocution, he certainly suggested that the
question of whether someone has performed the act, say, of warning
is essentially a question about how they meant their utterance to be
understood.!35 But he assumed that the ‘uptake’ of illocutionary acts
required the presence of such strong linguistic conventions that he later

=== p. 262 ===

appeared to suggest that such conventions, rather than the intentions
of speakers, must be definitive of illocutionary acts.13¢
   Nevertheless, I still think it essentially correct to expand Austin’s
analysis in the direction subsequently taken by Strawson!37 and Searle,!38
and later by Schiffer and Holdcroft.!39 It seems to me, that is, that if we
wish to furnish the definition of illocutionary acts which Austin failed to
provide, we need to take seriously their status as acts and think about the
kinds of intentions that have to go into their successful performance.!4°
This is not of course to deny that the exact character of these complex
and recursive intentions might become (as threatened to happen at one
point) a subject of endless philosophical debate. It is only to assert that
the right kind of analysis must be along those lines. So I see no reason
to doubt the central claim I seek to defend in chapter 4 of the present
volume: that to perform an illocutionary act will always be equivalent
to speaking (or writing) with a certain intended illocutionary force.
   Although my remarks so far have been expository, it is I think vital to
add that we run a danger of missing their significance if we think of them
as an exposition of something called ‘the theory of speech-acts’. It seems to
me seriously misleading to describe Wittgenstein or Austin as proposing a
theory in the sense of putting forward an hypothesis about language. Their
achievement is better described as that of finding a way of describing, and
thereby of calling to our attention, a dimension and hence a resource of
language that every speaker and writer exploits all the time, and which we
need to identify whenever we wish to understand any serious utterance.
   To express the point in this style is not-just to insist on a preferred
facon de parler. \t is rather to insist that we shall miss the relevance of
speech-act analysis if we think of it (as several contributors to this volume
are content to do) as just another bit of fancy philosophical jargon we can
brush aside if we happen not to like the sound of it. The terminology I have
been describing points to a fact about language. We may of course wish to
deny that it performs that task adequately. But we can hardly deny the fact
itself — that anyone who issues a serious utterance will always be doing
something as well as saying something, and doing it in virtue of saying
what is said. That this is a fact is underlined by our language itself. It
contains a wide range of verbs the precise function of which is to enable us
to make explicit, in order to avoid misunderstanding, what exactly we see
ourselves as doing in saying what we say. Thus we can subjoin comments
like: am warning you; I am ordering you (or else: I am not issuing orders,
I am only only advising/suggesting/telling you something). The problem of
interpretation arises in part because we do not generally trouble, even in
such everyday cases, to make explicit exactly what we see ourselves as doing,
still less in the case of such enormously complex acts of communication as
those which normally attract the attention of literary critics and intellectual

=== p. 263 ===

historians. It may indeed be impossible to recover more than a small
fraction of the things that Plato, say, was doing in The Republic. My
point is only that the extent to which we can hope to understand
The Republic depends in part on the extent to which we can recover them.

                                       UJ
I should now like to examine the bearing of these considerations upon
the business of interpreting texts. Before I can do so, however, I first
need to meet a serious objection raised by several of my critics. I
cannot hope, they claim, to draw from the theory of linguistic action
the implications I have proposed, since my proposals are based on a series
of misunderstandings of the theory itself.
   My account is held to be defective in two distinct ways. First of
all, two contrasting errors have been detected in my exposition of the
connections between the intentions of speakers and the force of their
utterances. The first of these, Graham declares in chapter 8, stems from
my assumption that intentions and illocutions are ‘indissolubly linked’.
This means, he argues, that I fail to recognize that illocutionary intentions
may be present in the absence of the corresponding illocutionary act.!41
   Graham’s criticism is ambiguously formulated. His initial complaint
is that, by identifying what a speaker is doing ‘with what he means
or intends to be doing’, I fail to acknowledge that such intentions may
sometimes remain unrealized (8:151). Femia makes a similar point (9:157,
 159). I may fail, for example, to execute my intention to warn you of
something, simply because I may fail to perform the corresponding illocutionary act of bringing it about that you are warned.
   It would certainly be absurd to deny that an agent can form the
intention to speak with a certain force and then fail to perform the
intended act. If I form the intention to warn you and drop dead before
I can get the words out, then my intended act of warning will not be
performed. But I have never denied this rather obvious fact. I have tried
to make it clear, especially in the article reprinted as chapter 3, that I am
not concerned at all with intentions in the sense of plans to act. I am
solely concerned with intentions im acting, with intentional descriptions of
action, and thus with the question of what an agent may have intended
or meant by speaking or writing in a certain way.!42
   Femia seems to have missed the point; but Graham proceeds to
reformulate the criticism in a more interesting way. He suggests that
what I overlook is the fact that someone ‘may issue an utterance meaning
it as a warning    but fail to warn’        (9:152).   Even   if I speak or write
with the intended force of a warning, I may still fail to perform the
corresponding illocutionary act of bringing it about that you are warned.

=== p. 264 ===

   This contention certainly seems true to Austin’s original account,
and even more clearly to Strawson’s elaboration of it. Austin thought
it essential to the successful performance of an act, say, of warning
that the agent should secure ‘uptake’ of the act as an act of warning.!43
Austin   makes   it clear, moreover,   and Strawson    makes   it even   clearer,
that this notion of ‘uptake’ depends upon a particular analysis of the
descriptive element in the concept of action, an analysis that Graham’s
criticism in turn assumes to be correct.
   This analysis itself is a standard one, originally Aristotelian in provenance.
The basic idea is that any voluntary action must be capable of being
represented by the formula ‘bringing it about that p’. The value assigned
to ‘p’ must in turn be such as to indicate the new state of affairs brought
about as a result of the action.!44 To perform an action is thus to produce
some discernibly new end-state, one that can be represented not merely as
a consequence of, but as an indication of, the successful performance of
the action. As Austin himself puts it, ‘I cannot be said to have warned
an audience unless it hears what | say and takes what I say in a
certain sense’.!45 Something must be newly true of my audience for
my act to have been performed; I must at least succeed in altering its state of
understanding, even if I do not succeed in affecting its will.
  It is this familiar analysis, however, which seems to me defective.!46
It is of course true that I cannot be said to warn you unless I bring it
about that p (that you are warned). But this is only to put the description
through a passive transformation; it remains to assign a value to ‘p’. And
here it seems to me (pace Austin as well as Graham) that there are very
many locutions describing actions in which the only value we can hope to
assign to ‘p’ — the state of affairs brought about by the action — is that it
is the state of affairs brought about by the action. To put the point more
elegantly, as Davidson has done, there are many cases in which ‘p’ merely
designates an event, not a newly true state of affairs which can be represented as the consequence of the successful performance of the act.!47
   This certainly seems to apply to the case of warning. To warn someone
is to point out or advert to the fact that they are in danger. To succeed in
performing the illocutionary act of warning is thus to succeed in adverting
to that fact. This being so, it makes no sense to suggest, as Graham does, that
someone might succeed in speaking with the intended illocutionary force
of a warning and yet fail to perform the corresponding illocutionary act of
bringing it about that someone is warned. For to bring it about that someone
is warned is simply to succeed in adverting to the fact that they are in danger.
   I now turn to the contrasting mistake I am said to have made
in analysing the relations between intentions and illocutionary acts.
Graham argues that, just as there can be illocutionary intentions without
corresponding acts, so ‘I may perform an illocutionary act in the absence

=== p. 265 ===

of an appropriate intention’ (8:152). Shapiro and Boucher have both put
forward a similar criticism. As Shapiro expresses it, my ‘identification
of illocutionary force with intention’ leads me to overlook the class
of what Graham calls ‘unintentional illocutionary acts’.!48
   I cannot see that these critics have done anything to substantiate their
point. Shapiro and Boucher merely follow Graham, while Graham merely
offers a single example, the highly conventional one of ‘redoubling’ in
the game of bridge (8:152). Even this, moreover, fails to support his
conclusion that we have to recognize a class of unintentional illocutionary
acts. The example does not indicate that, without having the intention of
 redoubling, I may nevertheless perform that illocutionary act. Rather it
indicates something about the range of cases in which the illocutionary
force of an utterance may be altogether determined by the meaning of
the utterance and the context of its occurrence. It shows that there
may be cases in which an utterance may properly be claimed to carry
a certain illocutionary force, even if the corresponding illocutionary act
of speaking with that intended force was not performed.
   To insist on this point is by no means to fall into the absurdity of
supposing, as Graham believes, that it is impossible to warn someone
unintentionally. It is only to insist that, if |warn someone unintentionally,
this will not be because I have performed the illocutionary act of warning,
but unintentionally. To perform the illocutionary act of warning, as I
have argued above, is always to speak with the form and intended
force of a warning; the act is constituted as the act of warning by
the complex intentions that go into its performance. The reason why it
is nevertheless possible to warn someone unintentionally is that there may
be circumstances in which the issuing of a certain utterance will inevitably
be taken as a case of adverting to danger. In such circumstances the
agent will be understood to have spoken, and will in fact have spoken,
with the illocutionary force of a warning. This will remain the case
even if the agent spoke without any intention of warning, and in
consequence failed to perform the corresponding illocutionary act.
   As this suggests, Graham’s example underpins rather than undermines
my contention that illocutionary acts must be identified in terms of the
intentions of the agents who perform them. Graham claims that it may be
possible to speak with the form and force of ‘redoubling’ in the absence
of any such intention. But this is to say that, although the utterance may
have carried that illocutionary force, the absence of the relevant kinds of
intention on the part of the speaker meant that the corresponding illocutionary act was not performed. That this can happen is precisely my point.
   Graham and Shapiro have failed to recognize what I take to be the
distinction between illocutionary forces and illocutionary acts. The former
term points to a resource of language; the latter to the capacity of agents

=== p. 266 ===

to exploit it in communication. The illocutionary acts we perform are
identified, like all voluntary acts, by our intentions; but the illocutionary
forces carried by our utterances are mainly determined by their meaning and
context. It is for these reasons that it can readily happen that, in performing
an illocutionary act, my utterance may at the same time carry, though
without my intending it, a much wider range of illocutionary force.!4? (For
example, although I may intend only to warn you, my utterance may at the
same time have the force of informing you of something.) But this is only
to say that, due to the richness of our language, many and perhaps most of
my utterances will carry some element of unintended illocutionary force.15°
It is not in the least to point to a class of unintentional illocutionary acts.
   I now turn to the other main criticism levelled at my understanding of
speech-act analysis. This relates to my argument in chapter 4 about the connections between illocutionary redescription and explanation. Suppose we
come to understand (to continue with my example) that the policeman who
says “The ice over there is very thin’ is warning the skater. This provides us
with an illocutionary redescription of the policeman’s utterance. But at the
same time it supplies us with an understanding of the episode that we previously lacked. Graham quotes the inference I drew (8:150): not only do we
understand what the policeman’s utterance means, such that we can give an
account of what he said; we also understand what the policeman meant or
intended by what he said, such that we can give an account of why he said it.
   When I originally put forward this argument, I was partly interested in
its relevance to the debate then raging about the non-causal explanation
of action. Some of Wittgenstein’s disciples had argued that actions can be
non-causally explained because motives, which explain actions, are not
causes. Some of their opponents had retorted that motive-explanations
are   in fact causal,   and   had   drawn   the inference   that   there   cannot
be any non-causal explanations of action.!5! What the speech-act case
suggested, I tried to argue, was that even if motives are causes, there
can nevertheless be non-causal explanations of action.
   Graham objects that such illocutionary redescriptions only provide us
with additional information about what an agent may have been doing;
they do not provide us with any additional information about why he or
she may have been doing it (8:154). Hollis had earlier offered a similar
criticism, as had Freundlieb. The point on which they all converge, to
quote Graham’s summary, is that ‘what is unacceptable’ is my suggestion
that an illocutionary redescription ‘answers any question “why?”? (8:154).
   I now see that I misstated the point I was trying to make. As
Freundlieb emphasizes in his analysis of my example, the illocutionary
redescription of the policeman’s utterance ‘is not an explanation of the
speaker’s act at all but an explanation of why it publicly counts as a
warning’.!52 What is explained, in short, is not the occurrence of the act

=== p. 267 ===

but the character of the utterance. If we wish to explain the occurrence
of the act, as Hollis correctly adds, we have no option but to go on
to enquire into the agent’s motives for performing it (7:139, 141, 146).
   Nevertheless, my original thesis about the explanation of action stands.
Suppose some bystanders were puzzled by the episode of the skater. One
natural source of puzzlement might be the precise point or significance of
the policeman’s utterance. To inform them that it was meant as a warning
would then be to remove their puzzlement. But to say that a sense of
puzzlement (as opposed to a misconception) about a state of affairs has
been removed is to say that an explanation has been provided. So there
seems every reason to insist that illocutionary redescriptions function as
explanations. On the other hand, such explanations are not causal. They are
purely redescriptive, and cite no antecedents of the acts they explain. Hence
my thesis stands: even if motives for action are causes of the actions they
motivate, there can nevertheless be non-causal explanations of action.153
   Nor is Graham justified in his further objection that such explanations
leave us ‘none the wiser about why anything occurred’ (8:155). It is true
that we still need to identify the policeman’s motive for warning the skater.
But the redescription of his utterance as an act of warning certainly leaves
us considerably the wiser as to why he may have acted. For the motives
he could in principle have had for issuing a warning are very different
from the motives he could have had for issuing the same utterance with
the intended force, say, of a criticism of the skater’s recklessness. To
recover an illocutionary description is always to trench upon, and thereby
to circumscribe, the range of motives for the sake of which the agent may
have acted. Their recovery may thus be said to constitute an indispensable
step along the road to explaining why the act in question was performed.
   Hollis wants me to go on to say whether I think motives are in
fact the causes of the actions they motivate. Davidson and others have
made it fashionable to suppose they are,!54 and | have generally been
content to assume that they are right. It is true that | remain unclear
about the nature of these alleged causes and their mode of operation,
especially as it is evident that we cannot hope to identify them as
constant conjunctions of their effects. Nor have I found my puzzlement
much alleviated by the somewhat assertive manner in which Davidson
and his followers have chosen to present their case. Fortunately, however,
nothing in my own argument hinges upon the outcome of this long-standing
debate. So it seems to me (although I shall disappoint Hollis by saying
so) that the wisest course of action must be to leave it at that.

                                      ul
I now turn to those critics whose doubts have centred not on my
understanding of speech-act analysis itself, but rather on my assumption

=== p. 268 ===

that this type of analysis has something important to teach us about the
interpretation of texts.
   The criticisms they have advanced turn out to be based to a depressingly
large extent on a failure to understand what I have said. It seems to me,
for example, that Femia’s discussion of my alleged views, in chapter 9, is
almost entirely given over to attacking a series of positions I have never
sought to defend. I should not have found it congenial to go over this
ground again, so I am especially grateful to find that Jenssen’s recent
article about Pocock’s and my work has rendered this task unnecessary.    15°
Jenssen has generously rescued me from all the cruder misinterpretations to
which my essays have given rise, and has in addition carried the argument
forward into new areas with an enviable clarity and force.
   I cannot hope, however, simply to bow out there. For I find that,
even among the most careful and sympathetic contributors to the present
volume, I have been misunderstood at a number of points. This must
certainly be due to my own incapacities as an expositor. I am therefore
very glad to have the chance to indicate where these misunderstandings
have arisen, especially as this will enable me to restate my case in a
somewhat different and I hope a less confusing way.
   Minogue, for example, treats my approach as an instance of mere
mystification. I speak of the ‘decoding’ of utterances, ‘as if communication
involved a special form of scrambling to prevent its meaning being known
to outsiders’ (10:188). Minogue is certainly justified in sneering at my
jargon. But he misses the point when he complains that the meaning
of an utterance like “The ice over there is very thin’ stands in no need
of decoding. I have never suggested otherwise. When I speak about the
need to decode the meaning of such episodes, I am referring to the need
to decode what the speaker may have meant by saying what was said.
Was the utterance (the meaning of which is certainly clear) meant as a
warning, a criticism, a reproach, perhaps only a joke, or what? Even in
such an oversimplified case, the answer will never be clear on the surface.
And as soon as we turn to cases of any complexity, ‘decoding’ hardly
seems such a bad term to describe the procedures which will become
indispensable if we are to understand what was meant by what was said.
   Behind Minogue’s confusion there lurks, I discover to my consternation,
a much wider and more radical misunderstanding of my argument. Within
the present volume, it emerges most clearly in the contributions by Femia
and Keane. Femia takes me to be saying that ‘historicity demands that we
focus on what an author consciously intended to say’ (9:157). Keane adds
that the sheer naiveté of this commitment prevents me from recognizing the
force of ‘the commonplace distinction between what authors intend to say
and what their texts mean’ (12:207). Several other critics have converged
on the same point. Seidman construes my ‘intentionalist thesis’ as the claim

=== p. 269 ===

that ‘textual meaning’ must be identified ‘with the particular intentions of
the author’, so that ‘to decode the meaning of the text the interpreter must
recover the author’s intention’.!5¢ Gunnell similarly believes that my aim is
‘to develop hypotheses about what an author intended to say and therefore
what a text means’,!57 while LaCapra declares that I take the entire object
of intellectual history to be ‘the study of what authors meant to say’.158
   I certainly wish to cleave to the figure of the author, and I certainly
think it indispensable to the interpretation of texts to find out what
their authors may have meant. But I have done my best — though I
have clearly failed — to distinguish two separable questions that can
be raised about authorial intentionality. Let me try again.
   One is whether the understanding of the meaning of a text requires
us to focus on what its author intended to say rather than on what the
text itself may be said to mean. Some theorists, including Hirsch, Juhl
and others, have of course defended this commitment. They have argued
that, in Hirsch’s formulation, to understand ‘the meaning of a text’ is to
understand ‘what the text says’, which in turn requires us to recover ‘the
saying of the author’.!5? Their thesis, as Hirsch summarizes it, is thus that the
‘verbal meaning’ of a text ‘requires the determining will’ of an author, and
that this is what the interpreter must concentrate on trying to recover. 16°
   According to my critics, this is the thesis I endorse. As Jenssen
has already pointed out, however, this is scarcely a thesis I engage
with at all;!61 and in so far as I have considered it, I have largely
endorsed the anti-intentionalist case.
   I agree that, where a text says something other than what its author
intended to say, we are bound to concede that this is nevertheless what
the text says, and thus that it bears a meaning other than its author
intended.!62 This is not perhaps a very subtle point on which to insist
with as much vehemence as has recently become fashionable. But if
the question is seen, in a sufficiently myopic style, as one about the
understanding of texts, then of course the point must stand. It would
certainly be amazing if all the meanings, implications, connotations and
resonances that an ingenious interpreter might legitimately claim to find
in a given text could in turn be shown to reflect its author’s intentions
at every point. And it would be a straightforward mistake to infer
that, if we came upon some obviously unintended element, we should
have to exclude it from our account of the meaning of the text.
   As I vainly strove to make clear, however, in the essay reprinted
here as chapter 3, I have only wished to say as much about this
issue as will enable me to distinguish it from a second and different
question we can raise about authorial intentionality. This is the question
of what an author may have meant or intended by an utterance (whatever
may be the meaning of the utterance itself). To put the point in the

=== p. 270 ===

jargon I have been using, my principal sconcern has not been with
meaning but rather with the performance of illocutionary acts.
   As I have already argued, the question of what a speaker or writer may
have meant by saying something arises in the case of all serious utterances.
But it poses the most acute problems for interpretation in two main types of
case. One is that of irony. Here it seems indisputable that our understanding
depends on our capacity to recover what the author intended or meant by
what was said. But at the risk of some repetition it is perhaps worth spelling
out the way in which this is so. For it seems to me that the argument
has been misstated by those, like Juhl, who have wished to uphold the
thesis about authorial intentionality I have just considered and set aside.
   Juhl and others have argued that the phenomenon of irony offers the
clearest evidence in favour of their claim that we need to recover an author’s
intentions if we wish to understand ‘the meaning of a work’, the meaning
of what was said.!63 But when someone speaks or writes ironically, it
may well be that there is no difficulty at all about understanding the
meaning of what was said. It may well be that everything was said in
virtue of its ordinary meaning. Where there is a difficulty about the
understanding of such utterances, it generally arises not because of any
doubts about meaning, but rather because of some doubt as to whether
(as we colloquially put it) the speaker really meant what was said.
   The problem of detecting irony arises, in short, not as a problem about
meaning but illocutionary acts. The ironic speaker issues an utterance with
a certain meaning. At the same time, the speaker appears to perform
an illocutionary act of a kind that falls- within the range conventionally
performed by such utterances. To take an immortal example, the form and
apparent force of what Defoe says in “The Shortest Way with the Dissenters’
is that of suggesting, recommending or calling for a particular course of
action. (That religious dissenters be suppressed and preferably executed.)
   Reading Defoe’s simple proposal, however, we begin to doubt whether
the standard way in which the meaning of an utterance helps us to decode
its intended illocutionary force applies in this particular case. We come
to see that Defoe is making a comment about the very idea of issuing
such an utterance with the intended force that a mere inspection of its
meaning might tempt us to assign to it. The utterance has the undoubted
form and apparent force of a recommendation, even of a demand. But
Defoe is not performing the corresponding illocutionary act. On the
contrary, his illocutionary intention is that of ridiculing the intolerance
that would be embodied in performing it.
  This, then, is one type of case in which it is I think indispensable to
recover the intentions of authors if we wish to understand their utterances.
But the reason for this is not, pace Juhl, that we shall otherwise fail to
understand the meaning of what was said. The meaning of what Defoe said

=== p. 271 ===

                             A reply to my critics                          Padi
is perfectly clear. What he said was that religious dissent should be ranked
among capital offences.!¢4 What this means is that religious dissent should
be ranked among capital offences. The reason we need to recover Defoe’s
intentions is rather that we shall otherwise fail to understand what he was
doing in issuing this utterance. The intentions we need to recover are the
illocutionary intentions that went into his act of ridiculing and thereby
questioning contemporary religious intolerance. They are the intentions
we may be said to have recovered when we come to appreciate that this
is how he meant his utterance (with its given meaning) to be understood.
   There is another and vastly broader range of cases in which the
recovery of this form of intentionality raises special difficulties. This is
where the speaker or writer issues a serious utterance, but fails to make it
clear how exactly the utterance is to be taken or understood. This may of
course be because (as in the case of irony) the speaker lacks the standard
motive we normally possess for making explicit the intended force of our
utterances. But the most usual reason will rather be that the meaning
of the utterance itself, together with the context of its occurrence, are
such that the speaker feels no doubt about the capacity of the audience
to secure ‘uptake’ of the intended illocutionary act.
   Such confidence is generally well-founded in the case of ordinary
and everyday communications. So we usually regard it as over-emphatic
to employ what Austin called explicit performative formulae for making
manifest how exactly we intend our utterances to be taken.!65 Even here,
however, we may sometimes feel the need to reassure our intended audience.
(This prompts us to say things like ‘When I said that the ice over there is very
thin, I wasn’t criticizing you, I was only issuing a warning.’) And as soon as
we turn to more complex cases, especially historical utterances where we
are no longer the intended audience, such problems of ‘uptake’ can readily
become acute. In these instances it may be almost impossibly hard to recover
what the writer was doing in saying what was said. But the point on which
I have been insisting all along is that, unless we can somehow manage to
do so, we shall remain cut off from an entire dimension of understanding.
   To summarize: I have tried to distinguish two questions about the meaning and understanding of texts. One is the question of what the text means,
the other the question of what its author may have meant. I have argued
that, if we are to understand a text, both questions must be answered. It is
true, however, that while these questions are separable, they are not in the
end separate. If I am to understand what someone meant or intended by
what they said, I must first of all be sure that the meaning of what they said
was itself intended. For otherwise there will be nothing that they meant by it.
As I have tried to insist, however, this must at all costs be distinguished from
the thesis that the meaning of a text can be identified with what its author
intended. Any text must include an intended meaning; and the recovery of

=== p. 272 ===

272.                          Quentin Skinner

that meaning certainly constitutes a precondition of understanding what
its author may have meant. But any text of any complexity will always
contain far more meaning — what Ricoeur has called surplus meaning!®¢
— than even the most vigilant and imaginative author could possibly have
intended to put into it. So I am far from supposing that the meanings of
texts are to be identified with the intentions of their authors; what must be
identified with such intentions is only what their authors meant by them.
   Several of my critics have continued to shake their heads over the sadly
old-fashioned air of this commitment. Gunnell refers me to Gadamer’s
Truth and Method, with its claim that the yardstick of authorial intentionality is simply not available.!67 Seidman, as well as Keane in his
contribution to the present volume (12:206), both remind me of Ricoeur’s
analogous point that in the case of historical texts new meanings will
be continuously generated. | am held to have overlooked the implication
that, with a text of any complexity, the position will soon be reached
where the question of what its author may have intended to say and
the question of what the text can legitimately be taken to mean will
prove to have completely different answers. My critics agree with Ricoeur
(although the conclusion hardly follows) that once this point is reached,
what matters most will always be the ‘public meaning’ of the text.1¢8
   It has proved a short step from emphasizing the public character of
meaning to abandoning any concern with authorial intentionality. One
way of making the move has simply been to disavow any interest in
what authors may have meant in favour of explaining what their texts
mean to us. The study of texts thus becomes a purely consumer-orientated
study of ‘reader response’.!6? A yet more radical step has been to stress that
authors merely follow ‘discursive practices’, and thus to call in question
the very idea of an ‘author’: the object of historical analysis. becomes
‘the regularity of discursive practices’ themselves.17° This finally brings
us to the point, interesting to connoisseurs of the more decadent forms
of individualism, at which any concern with the determination of meaning
is simply dismissed. The reason usually given is not so much that it cannot
be determined; it is rather that any attempt to do so will interfere with
what Derrida calls ‘the joyous affirmation of the freeplay of the world’.171
   There are two threads of argument here that need to be disentangled.
Some of these theorists dismiss the study of intentions chiefly because
they find them of no interest. They claim to have found something
more important to investigate. But others claim that the attempt to
recover intentions is actually misconceived. They first suggest that the
idea of recovering what an author may have intended or meant to say
provides us with an unattainable or at least an inappropriate guide to
the meaning of what is said. And from this they infer that the recovery
of authorial intentionality is irrelevant to the understanding of texts.172

=== p. 273 ===

                             A reply to my critics                          Lis
   I have no objection to the first of these commitments. I remain
unrepentant in my belief that, if we are interested in recovering the
historical identity of texts, we are bound to interest ourselves in what
their authors meant. But if we are interested in something quite different —
in the study of their impact upon us, or in the free play of signifiers — then
there may indeed be no good reason to trouble about intentionality at all.
   By contrast, the second argument strikes me as fallacious. As a result,
I am far from agreeing with Gunnell and Keane that, had I paid
more attention to it, I should have come to see that my emphasis
on authorial intentionality is a mistake. On the contrary, it seems to
me that the theory of speech-acts provides us with the best means of
identifying the rather obvious non sequitur embodied in such statements
of the anti-intentionalist case. As I have already stressed, I am perfectly
willing to concede that the question of what an author may have intended
to say cannot possibly be equated with the meaning of what is said. I am
only objecting to the suggestion that it follows from this that the recovery
of intentionality is irrelevant to the interpretation of texts. To draw this
inference is simply to confuse all over again the two separable questions
about authorial intentionality I have striven to keep separate.

                                      IV

I must not over-emphasize the extent to which I feel misunderstood.
Most of my critics seem to have followed without undue difficulty what
I have tried to say about the recovery of intentions. Several of them,
however, have gone on to raise a number of serious objections to my
argument. And it is to those objections that I next want to devote myself.
   The main criticism is one that Graham and, more recently, Boucher
and Levine have especially stressed. Although Graham concedes that I
may be right about the importance of decoding what he calls the
‘actual illocutionary force’ of utterances, he points out that I have
failed to provide an adequate ‘recipe’ for doing so, an account of
‘how it is that such decoding can take place’.!73
   I have in fact gestured at what I take to be the two main ingredients
in any such attempt to analyse the concept of ‘uptake’. The most obvious
determinant of the intended illocutionary force of any utterance must be the
meaning of the utterance itself. Consider only the most obvious fact: that
meaning is affected by grammatical mood. When the policeman issues the
utterance ‘The ice over there is very thin’, the intended illocutionary force of

=== p. 274 ===

the utterance cannot, for example, be that of.questioning the skater.!74 This
is not to say — with Cohen, Schiffer and others — that the concept of illocutionary force simply describes an aspect of the meaning of utterances.!7° It
has been my whole purpose to insist that it points to a separable dimension
of language. But there can be no doubt that the meaning of utterances helps
to limit the range of illocutionary forces they can bear, and thereby serves to
exclude the possibility that certain illocutionary acts are being performed.
   The other determinant I have tried to emphasize is the context and
occasion of utterances. The notion of context, especially as Holdcroft has
explicated it, is one of great complexity.!76 But we can readily single out
the most crucial element in it. This is the fact that all serious utterances
are characteristically intended as acts of communication. So they characteristically occur, as Austin always insisted, either as acts of a conventionally
recognizable character, or else more broadly in the form of recognizable
interventions in what Austin called a total speech-act situation.!77
   The point can be extended, and brought into line with my present concerns, by emphasizing that the types of utterance J am considering can never
be viewed simply as strings of propositions; they must always be viewed at
the same time as arguments. Now to argue is always to argue for or against
a certain assumption or point of view or course of action. It follows that,
if we wish to understand such utterances, we shall have to identify the
precise nature of the intervention constituted by the act of uttering them.
   As Tully observes in his Introduction, I take this to be the first step in any
attempt to grasp what someone may have meant by saying something. If we
fail to take it, as Wootton has excellently remarked, we shall find ourselves
in a position comparable to that of someone listening to the prosecution or
the defence in a criminal trial without having heard the other side’s case.
We shall find it impossible to understand ‘why apparently promising lines
of argument are never pursued, while at other times what seem to be trivial
distinctions and secondary issues are subjected to lengthy examination’.!78
   To put it another way, there is a sense in which we need to understand
why a certain proposition has been put forward if we wish to understand
the proposition itself.17? We need to see it not simply as a proposition,
but also as a move in argument. So we need to grasp why it seemed
worth making that precise move; to recapture the presuppositions and
purposes that went into the making of it.
   My first step is thus a generalization (as Wootton notes) of Collingwood’s
dictum to the effect that understanding any proposition requires us to
identify the question to which the proposition may be regarded as an
answer.!8° | am claiming, that is, that any act of communication always
constitutes the taking up of some determinate position in relation to
some pre-existing conversation or argument. It follows that, if we wish
to understand what has been said, we shall have to be able to identify

=== p. 275 ===

what exact position has been taken up. So far I have expressed this
contention in terms of Austin’s claim that we need to be able to
understand what the speaker or writer may have been doing in saying
what was said. But it is I think a fascinating though unnoticed feature
of Austin’s analysis that it can in turn be viewed as an exemplification
of what Collingwood called the ‘logic of question and answer’.181
   One final observation about this notion of intervening in a context.
There is no implication that the relevant context need be an immediate
one.!82 As Pocock has especially emphasized, the questions and problems
to which writers see themselves as responding may have been raised at
a remote period, even in a wholly different culture.!83 The appropriate
context for understanding the point of such writers’ utterances will
therefore be whatever context enables us to appreciate the nature of
the intervention constituted by their utterances. To recover that context
in any particular case, we may have to engage in extremely wide-ranging
as well as extremely detailed historical research.
   Graham, Lockyer and others among my critics have objected that
this proposed method of identifying the intended illocutionary force of
utterances ‘can never start’, since it involves ‘an insuperable circularity’.
As I have just indicated, the process is undoubtedly circular; but there is
surely no difficulty about seeing where to start. What I am claiming is
that we should start by elucidating the meaning, and hence the subject
matter, of the utterances in which we are interested. We should then turn
to the context of their occurrence in order to determine how exactly they
connect with, or relate to, other utterances concerned with the same subject
matter. My suggestion is that, if we succeed in identifying this context with
sufficient accuracy, we can eventually hope to read off what the speaker or
writer in whom we are interested was doing in saying what he or she said.
   By way of illustration, consider the most straightforward type of case, that
of a simple declarative utterance. Let us again take Machiavelli’s claim that
mercenary armies always undermine liberty. There is little difficulty about
understanding the meaning of the utterance itself. But we wish in addition
to understand what Machiavelli may have meant by it. So we turn to the
general context in which it occurred. Suppose we find that the sentiment
expressed by the utterance was frequently expressed in the political literature of the time. Then we are already justified in saying that Machiavelli
is repeating, upholding or agreeing with an accepted attitude or viewpoint.
Looking more closely at the intervention constituted by his utterance, we
may feel able to go further. We may feel justified in adding that he is
endorsing, confirming or concurring with an accepted truth; alternatively,
may find that he is only conceding, admitting or allowing it to be true.
   On the other hand, we may find that he is saying something no
longer generally accepted, even though it may at one time have been widely

=== p. 276 ===

agreed. Then perhaps what he is doing is restating, reaffirming or recalling
his audience to the truth of what he says. Perhaps, more specifically, he is
at the same time emphasizing, underlining or insisting-on its truth.
   Or again, we may find that what he says is not generally accepted
at all. Then perhaps what he is doing is denying and repudiating, or
perhaps correcting and revising, a generally accepted belief. Or he may
be enlarging, developing or adding to an established argument by drawing
out its implications in an unexplored way. At the same time, he may
be pressing or urging a recognition of this new viewpoint, or advising,
recommending or even warning his audience of the need to adopt it.
   A further range of possibilities comes into view as soon as we reflect
on the point I seek to emphasize in chapter 6: that when we describe
a situation or state of affairs, we often do so in such a way as
to evaluate it at the same time. Thus we may find that Machiavelli
is espousing, championing or commending a particular conclusion or
course of action as well as describing it; alternatively, we may find that
he is questioning, challenging or condemning it. More specifically, he may
be applauding or celebrating it; or else visiting it with ridicule or scorn.
   The upshot of employing this approach, it is perhaps worth underlining,
is to challenge any categorical distinction between texts and contexts.185
Keane maintains that I still adopt an ‘author—subject’ approach, thereby
suggesting that I have yet to hear about the death of the author announced
by Barthes and Foucault (12:205). It is true that these announcements.
strike me as a trifle exaggerated. I cannot agree with Keane that authors
are nothing more than ‘prisoners of the discourse within whose boundaries
they take pen in hand’ (12:205). I agree of course (see chapter 5) that we
are all limited by the concepts available to us if we wish to communicate.
But it is no less true (see chapter 6) that language constitutes a resource as
well as a constraint. This means that, if we wish to to do justice to those
moments when a convention is challenged or a commonplace effectively
subverted, we cannot simply dispense with the category of the author.
A point that takes on added significance when we reflect that, to the
extent that our social world is constituted by our concepts, any successful
alteration in the use of a concept will at the same time constitute a change
in our social world. The pen, as Tully puts it, can be a mighty sword.
   Nevertheless, it ought to be obvious that the approach I am sketching
leaves the traditional figure of the author in extremely poor health.
Reiterating, defending, underpinning commonplace insights as they generally do, individual authors can readily — perhaps too readily — come to
seem mere precipitates of their contexts. It is certainly an implication of my
approach (as I pointed out in the first essay I ever wrote about these matters)
that the idea of discourse, not individual authors, becomes the main focus of
attention.!8¢ The historian primarily studies what Pocock calls ‘languages’

=== p. 277 ===

                             A reply to my critics                         Th

of discourse, and only secondarily the relationship between individual
contributions to such languages and the range of discourse as a whole.!87
   A number of my critics have retorted that this is to fall rather obviously
short of my stated aim of recovering what individual writers may have
intended or meant. We may be able to say of a given contribution to
a pre-existing discourse that it constituted an attack on one position, a
defence of another, and so forth. We may be able, that is, to establish
what its author was doing. But as Hollis observes, this is only to show
that the cap fits, not that the author was wearing it (7:140). We arrive
at a point, Tully similarly remarks, at which we may be able to show
that a given argument served a given purpose. But this is not to show
that the argument was designed or intended to serve that purpose
(1:10) To express the objection — as Graham does — in the idiom |
have been using, the recipe enables us to identify ‘a range of possible
illocutionary forces’ but not the performance of any illocutionary acts.!88
   As | have already intimated, however, there are some cases in which
the recipe will in fact enable us to identify what Graham calls the actual
illocutionary force of certain utterances. These will be the cases, already
examined, in which the meaning of the utterance and the context of its
occurrence are already sufficient to fix its illocutionary force, regardless
of whether the speaker issued the utterance with that intended force.
   To put the point in Shapiro’s jargon, the recipe is already sufficient to
enable us to identify ‘real acts’.189 This is not to say that I find Shapiro’s
jargon acceptable. In fact it seems to me notably infelicitous, if only because
the list of things | may properly be said to be doing may well include a
number of items that cannot possibly be classified as acts. (For example,
falling down stairs is undoubtedly an instance of doing something, but
is not the description even of an unintentional act.) Still less do I agree
with the point Shapiro employs his jargon to make. He claims that my
approach ‘takes no account’ of real acts.!9° But in fact I begin by focusing
on them, first singling out the range of things a speaker may be said to be
doing in issuing a given utterance, and then asking whether the utterance
in question may have been intended to carry just that illocutionary force.
   Nor is it right to object, as Graham and Hollis have done, that this still
leaves us without any means of moving from the first of these stages to the
second.!9! Suppose that (to revert to my example) we already know the list
of things that Machiavelli was undoubtedly doing in saying what he said
about mercenaries. We also know that, if he was engaged in an intended
act of communication, there must have been something he was intentionally
doing in saying what he said. It seems to me that the best hypothesis to
adopt at this stage will usually be to assume that he was doing what he
was doing intentionally, and thus that we have in fact identified the range
of intended illocutionary forces with which his utterance was produced.

=== p. 278 ===

   Once this stage is reached, moreover, it becomes a matter of no
great difficulty to close the gap still further by testing this hypothesis
in various ways. I have already tried in chapter 3.to sketch how this
can be done, and it hardly seems appropriate to rehearse those arguments
here. Suffice it to underline the three most obvious points.
   The first is that intentions depend on beliefs. We therefore need to
make sure that Machiavelli possessed a set of beliefs appropriate to the
formation of the kinds of intentions we are ascribing to him. As to how
we can hope to recover such beliefs, and thereby avoid the dangers of
anachronism that obviously loom at this point, I have already tried to give
my answer in the section ‘On describing and explaining beliefs’, above.
   The next point is that the intentions with which we act are closely
connected with our motives. This provides a vital means of corroborating
any hypothesis to the effect that a speaker or writer may have intended a
certain utterance to bear a particular illocutionary force. For the suspicion
that someone may have performed a certain action will always be
greatly strengthened (as every reader of detective stories knows) by
the discovery that they had a motive for performing it.
   It is perhaps worth underlining this familiar point, if only because
Hollis accuses me of paying too little attention to motives (7:136, 139). It is
true that I have taken a special interest in the kind of redescriptive cases I
have already discussed, where we are able to explain certain puzzles about
actions without enquiring into the motives for performing them. But I
certainly agree that, if we are trying to find out whether someone meant to
perform an action they may appear to have performed, an investigation of
their motives will always be an indispensable help.
   Finally, ascriptions of intentionality can be further corroborated by
examining the coherence of a speaker’s or writer’s beliefs. Suppose that,
in issuing the utterance we have been considering, Machiavelli upheld one
position in argument, rejected another, attacked one course of action,
implicitly commended another, and so on. Assuming that he held minimally
coherent beliefs, we can safely assume — in a sense we can predict — that he
will also adopt a number of related attitudes. If he upholds position (a), we
can expect him to reject the negation of (a); if he commends alternative
(x), we can expect him to denounce the contrary of (x); and so on. If upon
further investigation we find these expectations defeated, we shall begin to
feel at a complete loss. But if we succeed in recovering just such a network of
attitudes, we shall feel increasingly justified in our initial hypothesis: that, in
issuing his utterance with the force of upholding and commending a certain
position, he must have intended his utterance to bear exactly that force.
   At this stage, however, I come to the most startling objection my
critics have raised. Some have retorted that it is simply a misconception
to suppose that, by these means or any other, we can ever hope genuinely

=== p. 279 ===

to recover the intentions with which a given utterance was issued. Among
contributors to the present volume, Keane in particular insists that we can
never hope to ‘re-enact’ intentionally produced utterances; the very idea
embodies an old-fashioned, ‘covertly positivist model’ of interpretation, one
‘long since abandoned within the most sophisticated circles’ (12:209).
   I am of course anxious not to be unfashionable, still less unsophisticated.
So I have tried to follow with particular care the reasons Keane and
others have given for supposing that the recovery of intentions is actually
impossible. The main argument they have advanced is one they usually
profess to derive from Gadamer. First it is claimed that the recovery of
intentions presupposes the old hermeneutic ambition of trying (as Keane
puts it) to understand other agents by ‘empathetically looking them in
the eye and stepping into their shoes’ (12:209). It is then pointed out
that the idea of taking up such a position inside other people’s minds
and thinking their thoughts after them is little short of absurd. From
this it is said to follow that the project of trying to recover intentions
is not just embarrassingly naive but obviously misconceived (12:209 — 10).
   I find myself embarrassed in turn not just by the evident non sequitur
embodied in this argument, but also by the old-fashioned positivism
presupposed by it. I can only respond by trying to make clearer the
logically behavourist, essentially Wittgensteinian argument on which |
have been relying throughout, and which these critics appear altogether
to have missed.
   Of course we cannot hope to step into the shoes of past agents, still
less into their minds. But it does not follow that we cannot hope to
recover the intentions with which their utterances were issued, and hence
what they meant by them. The reason is that the intentions with which
anyone performs any successful act of communication must, ex hypothesi,
be publicly legible. Suppose I come to understand that the man waving his
arms in the next field is not trying to chase away a fly, but is warning me
that the bull is about the charge.!92 To recognize that he is warning me is
to understand the intentions with which he is acting. But to recover these
intentions is not a matter of identifying the ideas inside his head at the
moment when he first begins to wave his arms. It is merely a matter of
grasping the fact that arm-waving can count as warning, and that this is
the convention he is exploiting in this particular case. Nothing in the way
of ‘empathy’ is required, since the meaning of the episode is entirely public
and intersubjective. !93 As a result, the intentions with which the man is acting
can be inferred from an understanding of the significance of the act itself.
   I have been arguing that texts are acts. To understand them, we
need to recover the intentions with which they are written. But I have
also been arguing that this is not the mysterious empathetic process
that old-fashioned hermeneutics may have led us to suppose. For acts

=== p. 280 ===

are in turn analogues of texts: they embody intersubjective meanings
which we can hope to read off.14
   A number of my critics, however, raise a further objection at this point.
To speak in this way about the recovery of intentions, Mulligan and others
declare, is to concede that they are ‘irrecoverable’ after all. For this method
of trying to recover them is such that I can never hope to ‘demonstrate’
any claims about intentionality with anything approaching certainty.!?°
   This reason for abandoning all talk about intentionality is one that
Derrida has also emphasized. Consider, for example, his much-discussed
analysis in Spurs of the fragment, found among Nietzsche’s manuscripts,
which reads ‘I have forgotten my umbrella’.19* Derrida concedes that there
is no difficulty about understanding the meaning of the sentence. “Everyone
knows what “I have forgotten my umbrella” means.’!97 His only objection
to the despised figure whom he labels ‘the hermeneut’ is that such persons
fail to recognize that this still leaves us without any ‘infallible way’
of recovering what Nietzsche may have meant.!?8 “We will never know
for sure what Nietzsche wanted to say or do when he noted these words.’!99
   I have no wish to question such obvious truths. Some utterances are
completely lacking in the sorts of context from which we can alone hope
to infer the intentions with which they were uttered. We may well have
to concede in such cases that we can never hope to arrive at even
a plausible hypothesis about how the utterance in question should be
understood. The example of the umbrella seems, indeed, to be just such
a case. Even when an utterance can be assigned to a highly determinate
context, moreover, the outcome of the hermeneutic enterprise can never be
anything approaching the attainment of a final, self-evident and indubitable
set of truths about the utterance concerned.
  It scarcely follows   from   this, however,    that we   can   never   hope to
construct and corroborate plausible hypotheses about the intentions with
which a given utterance may have been issued. We can frequently do so in
just the manner I have tried to set out. We can focus on the intersubjective
meanings of illocutionary acts, and then seek further corroboration for
such ascriptions of intentionality by enquiring into the motives and beliefs
of the agent in question and in general the context of the utterance itself.
   We can of course stipulate, if we like, that the result will not be
a valid interpretation, since it will still fall far short of certitude. If we
insist, as Derrida does, on such an equation between establishing that
something is the case and being able to demonstrate it ‘for sure’, then
admittedly it follows that we can never hope to establish the intentions
with which a text may have been written. But equally it follows that
we can never hope to establish that life is not a dream. The moral of
this, however, is not that we have no reason to believe that life is not a
dream. The moral is rather that the sceptic is insisting on far too stringent

=== p. 281 ===

an account of what it means to have reasons for our beliefs. Haunted
as Derrida seems to be by the ghost of Descartes, he has concentrated
on attacking a position which no theorist of intentionality need defend.
   This view of interpretation remains far too optimistic, some of my critics
finally riposte; it forgets the special constraints under which an interpreter
is obliged to operate. Here again Gadamer’s name tends to be invoked. He
is said to have established that, as Gunnell puts it, it is impossible ‘to free
one’s self from the horizon of the present’.2°° The image of imprisonment
is one that several others of my critics pick up. Hall assures me that,
being ‘trapped in time’, I am ‘incapable of neutrally reconstructing a past
thinker’s intentions’.2°! Keane similarly adjures me to recognize that I can
never hope to ‘jump freely over the boundaries’ of my prejudices (p.210).
   Keane finds it ‘very surprising? that I have missed this point, but I
find it surprising that he should have missed the emphasis I have tried
to place on it. I have always insisted that, as I put it in chapter 2, we
inevitably approach the past in the light of contemporary paradigms and
presuppositions, the influence of which may easily serve to mislead us at
every turn. I have also conceded that the enterprise of recovering the
kinds of intentions in which I am interested requires a level of historical
awareness and sheer erudition that few of us can aspire to reach. I have
further conceded that, even when we feel confident about our ascriptions of
intentionality, such ascriptions are of course nothing more than inferences
from the best evidence available to us, and as such are defeasible at any
time. My precepts, in short, are only claims about how best to proceed; they
are not claims about how to guarantee success.
   I protest only at the assumption that it follows from this that the kinds
of intentions I have been discussing are, as Derrida claims, in all cases ‘in
principle inaccessible’.2°2 If this were true, the effect would not only be
to cut off the type of hermeneutics in which I am interested; it would
also be to render meaningless a whole range of practices extending from
the conducting of orchestras to the assessment of criminal responsibility.
Such scepticism strikes me as unhelpfully hyperbolical, especially when we
reflect that even animals are sometimes capable of recovering the intentions
with which people act. Dogs often disclose by their responses that they are
able to distinguish between an accidental and a deliberate kick. Derrida
ought surely to be able to rise to at least the same interpretative heights.

                                      Vv

Having restated my case, I am now in a position to clear up two undoubted
confusions in my original presentation of my argument. One of the claims I

=== p. 282 ===

put forward in the essay reprinted here as chapter 2 was that, because of the
need to pay attention to the illocutionary dimension of utterances, there can
never be any prospect of understanding a text simply byreading it over and
over. But a number of my critics, especially Boucher and King, have objected
that this was to set up a straw man: no one ever supposed that the meaning
of a text can be recovered simply by studying ‘the text in itself’.293
   I cannot accept that I entirely missed the mark. Parekh and Berki
have criticized me precisely on the grounds that I fail to appreciate
that some texts have ‘no specific context’ and make ‘eminent sense’
when considered simply in themselves.2°4 More recently, Mansfield has
made it a leading principle of what he takes to be the right approach to
studying Machiavelli’s Prince and Discourses that they must be read ‘each
by itself without any reference whatever to anything outside them’ .25
   Nevertheless, I agree that I misstated my point. My objection is not
so much to those who treat texts as self-sufficient objects of enquiry
and understanding. My objection is rather to those who assume that
the business of understanding a text is simply a matter of recovering,
by whatever means, the meaning of the text itself. This is the assumption
— at least as widespread as it was when I first wrote — that I still
wish to reject in the name of the need to recover, at the same time,
what the author of the text may have meant by it.
   I can best summarize my dissatisfaction with those historians who fail
to raise this further question by saying that they seem to me to suffer from
what might be called insufficient puzzlement. Consider for example the
exegetical literature on Descartes’ Meditations. Descartes thinks it crucial
to be able to vindicate the idea of indubitable knowledge. But why is this
an issue for him at all? Traditional historians of philosophy have scarcely
acknowledged the question; they have generally taken it for granted that,
since Descartes is an epistemologist, and since the problem of certainty is
one of the central problems of epistemology, there is no special puzzle here
at all. They have thus been able to concentrate on what they take to be
their basic interpretative task, that of critically examining what Descartes
actually says about how we can come to know anything with certainty.2%
   My dissatisfaction with this approach stems from the fact that — to
revert to Collingwood’s idiom — it leaves us without any sense of the
specific question to which Descartes may have intended his doctrine
of certainty as a solution. In consequence it leaves us without any
understanding of what he may have been doing in presenting his doctrine
in the precise form in which he chose to present it. It has I think been one
of the major advances in Descartes scholarship of recent years to establish
that part of what he was doing was responding to Pyrrhonian scepticism.
Not only was he addressing himself specifically to that challenge; it has
also been shown that this helps to explain both the character of his

=== p. 283 ===

own anti-sceptical arguments and the nature of the tactics he adopted
in developing them.297
   I made a further mistake in framing my criticism of such historians
as a denial of the claim that there are any ‘perennial problems’ in
philosophy. I wanted to get as far away as possible from the assumption
that there is a canonical list of ‘the problems of philosophy’, that the list
includes such ineliminable items as ‘the problem of certainty’, and that
we only need to point to the list in order to explain the preoccupations
of individual philosophers. But, as Boucher and others of my critics have
observed, I went too far. My way of putting the point appeared to deny
the obvious fact that western traditions of philosophy have contained long
continuities, and that these have been reflected in the stable employment
of a number of key concepts and modes of argument.2
   I still feel that emphasizing such continuities is hardly the same as
establishing their perennial status. So I still remain the sworn foe of those
who wish to write the type of history in which — to take an example which
has recently been discussed — the views of Plato, Augustine, Hobbes and
Marx on ‘the nature of the just state’ are compared.299 The reason for my
nominalism, as I have tried to stress all along, is not so much that each of
these thinkers appears to answer the question in his own way. It is rather
that the terms employed in phrasing the question — ‘nature’, ‘just’ and ‘state’
— feature in their different theories, if at all, only in such divergent ways
that it seems an obvious confusion to suppose that any stable concepts are
being picked out. The mistake, in short, lies in supposing that there is any
one question to which these various thinkers are all addressing themselves.
   Nevertheless, it was an error to formulate this criticism as a doubt about
‘perennial questions’, especially as this in turn gave the impression2!° that
my precepts and my own historical practice are out of line with each
other. My objection is not of course to those who stress the long-standing
character of many of our philosophical disputes. My objection is only to
the practice of abstracting particular arguments from the context of their
occurrence in order to relocate them as ‘contributions’ to such disputes.
Even if we find that a given philosopher is merely reaffirming an established
line of argument, we still need to be able to grasp what he or she
was doing in reaffirming it if we wish to understand the argument itself.
   I can best restate my objection by observing, in Wittgenstein’s phrase,
that concepts are tools.2!! To understand a concept, it is necessary to
grasp not merely the meanings of the terms used to express it, but
also the range of things that can be done with it. This is why, in
spite of the long continuities that have undoubtedly marked our inherited
patterns of thought, I remain unrepentant in my belief that there can be
no histories of concepts as such; there can only be histories of their
uses In argument.

=== p. 284 ===

                                      VI

My friendliest critics have raised no objections to the general line of
argument I have now tried to lay out. They have merely wondered
whether it is of much importance. Seidman has declared in an Endnote
to his critique of my approach that it has no ‘legitimacy’ beyond the
narrow confines of the history of political philosophy.2!2 Hough has
added that, while we can undoubtedly hope to recover the intended
force of utterances, the effect of doing so will merely be to supply
us with meagre and generalized characterizations of the texts involved.*!4
    I ought first to say that my emphasis on illocutionary acts is not
primarily due to any belief in their special significance. I have never
wished to suggest that the sole or even the principal business of the
intellectual historian is that of recovering what authors may have meant.?!4
I have placed my main emphasis on this dimension chiefly because it
continues to be so readily and so frequently overlooked.
    Nevertheless, these doubts about the scope and application of my
arguments are, I think, misplaced. To see why this is so, consider some
recent studies which have focused attention on the question of what
particular authors may have meant. Take, for example, Donald Winch’s
study of Malthus. This establishes that the original Essay on Population
was in part designed as a theodicy.2!5 Or take Adkins’s history of Greek
moral values. This establishes that part of what Plato was doing in the
Republic was trying to recover and assign a renewed prominence to the
quieter virtues of social life.7'® Or take Butler’s account of ‘the war of ideas’
in late eighteenth-century English literature. This establishes the precise way
in which Jane Austen intended her novels to bear a message of a Christian
 and more specifically a socially conservative character.*!”
    These are certainly brief characterizations of complex texts. But their
implications are far from meagre. By claiming to indicate what each author
was doing, they furnish us with a key to their texts and in consequence
 a means of explicating many of their detailed effects. Turning back to
the texts with these characterizations in mind, we may find ourselves in
 a much better position to answer a wide range of questions about them.
We may be able to explain why they are organized in a certain way, why
 certain arguments recur in them, why a particular normative vocabulary
 is employed, and in general why they possess a certain shape and identity.
    Nor are such general characterizations all that this approach can hope
 to yield. I have perhaps encouraged this misconception by the way in
 which I have spoken, often in the singular, about the recovery of intended
 illocutionary force. But it ought to be obvious that an immense range of
 illocutionary acts will normally be embedded within the types of texts I

=== p. 285 ===

have been discussing, and that even the smallest individual fragments of such
texts may sometimes carry a heavy freight of intended illocutionary force.
   As an example, consider the end of E. M. Forster’s A Passage to
India. The novel closes with the words: ‘Weybridge, 1924’.218 The meaning
is clear enough: Forster is stating that he completed the book in a Surrey
suburb in the year 1924. At the same time he is following a convention,
more common at the time than nowadays, of informing his readers
about the circumstances in which he wrote it. It may seem that there
is nothing more to be said. Indeed, it may seem almost absurd to go
on to ask the type of question in which I am interested — but what
is Forster doing in stating such facts? Surely he is simply stating them.
   But is this so clear? We may find ourselves reflecting that the convention
of signing off novels in this way was sometimes used to draw attention to the
romantically nomadic character of authorship. Joyce’s Ulysses, for example,
published only two years before, is signed “Trieste—Ziirich—Paris’.2!9 By
locating himself firmly in Weybridge — the classic instance of a prosaic
English suburb — Forster introduces a definite note of mockery as well
as self-ridicule. At the same time, we may find ourselves reflecting that the
convention of signing-off was sometimes used in addition to underline the
fact that literary labour can be an impressively protracted affair. The dates
at the end of Ulysses, for example, read ‘1914-1921’. By confining himself
to a single year, Forster allows himself a touch of hauteur, even of scorn, at
the expense of those who preferred to emphasize their creative agonies.
Once we see this much, we may well begin to suspect that Forster is
satirizing the entire convention of signing-off fictional works by indicating
the posturing to which the convention gave rise.
   I end with this example as a way of underlining the fact that the proposal
I am putting forward about the recovery of illocutionary acts is neither so
jejune nor so restricted in scope as my critics have maintained. It is certainly
a mistake to suppose that the recovery of this dimension will be of no interest
except in the case of certain restricted genres of texts. The dimension is present in the case of all serious utterances, whether in verse or in prose, whether
in philosophy or in literature. It is a further mistake to suppose that the
recovery of this dimension will merely provide us with general characterizations of the works involved. Any text of any complexity will always contain
a myriad of illocutionary acts, and any individual phrase in any such text —
as I have just indicated — may even contain more acts than it contains words.
   This is indeed one of the most obvious reasons why we can never
expect our debates about interpretation to have a stop. As I have tried to
indicate, the reason is not that there is nothing determinate to be said. It
is rather that, in the case of a work of any complexity, there will always
be room for legitimate and potentially endless debate about — to use
Austin’s phrase — how exactly the work may have been meant to be taken.

=== p. 286 ===

                                     Vil

I have now said as much as I want to say about the two central issues
I promised to discuss at the outset. Before bringing this reply to a close,
however, I should like to mention one final objection that a number of my
critics have levelled against my entire argument. Among contributors to the
present volume, Femia has expressed it most bluntly. He claims that I ‘treat
the ideas of our ancestors as purely historical phenomena’ and thus regard
them as ‘completely without modern relevance’ (9:159, 163). But if we take
this approach seriously, he suggests, we shall rob the study of intellectual
history of its point. The effect will be to ‘reduce the history of thought
to little more than a sterile celebration of intellectual pedigree’ (9:158).
   A number of my other critics have voiced similar anxieties. Tarlton
wonders how the fruits of my approach could ever hope to be ‘of
any more than the dustiest antiquarian interest’.22° Gunnell similarly
complains that ‘apart from scholarly antiquarianism, the purpose of the
enterprise and its relationship to the wider endeavour of political inquiry
is far from clear’.22! And Warrender forthrightly concludes that, in the
case of ‘the classic texts in political philosophy’, the outcome of adopting
my approach would simply be ‘to bury them’.222
   There is much to be said about the depressingly philistine view of
historical enquiry presupposed by this line of argument. But I shall not
attempt a full consideration of that issue here. One reason is that I have
already tried to explain why-it seems to me needlessly blinkered to suppose
that intellectual history can only be ‘relevant’ if it enables us to reflect our
current beliefs and assumptions back at us.2?3 A further reason is that
Jenssen, in his recent article about my work, has admirably illustrated
the falsity of the dichotomy between past-minded and present-minded
approaches to the study of social and political thought, and has greatly
extended and deepened the arguments I originally tried to lay out.224
   Nevertheless, it is perhaps worth underlining two obvious points.
The first might be labelled the anthropological justification for studying
intellectual history. The investigation of alien systems of belief provides
us with an irreplaceable means of standing back from our own prevailing
assumptions and structures of thought, and of situating ourselves in relation
to other and very different forms of life. To put the point in the way
that Gadamer and Rorty have recently done, such investigations enable us
to question the appropriateness of any strong distinction between matters
of ‘merely historical’ and ‘genuinely philosophical’ interest, since they
enable us to recognize that our own descriptions and conceptualizations
are in no way uniquely privileged.225
   But what, it is often asked, is the point of seeing ourselves in this
way as simply one tribe among others? There are many cogent answers,

=== p. 287 ===

although it is hard to avoid sounding sententious in mentioning them. We
can hope to attain a certain kind of objectivity in appraising rival systems
of thought. We can hope to attain a greater degree of understanding, and
thereby a larger tolerance, for various elements of cultural diversity. And
above all, we can hope to acquire a perspective from which to view
our own form of life in a more self-critical way, enlarging our present
horizons instead of fortifying local prejudices.226
   This is not merely to say that our historical studies may help us to become
less parochial in our attachment to inherited beliefs. We may also find, as
a result of engaging in such studies, that some of what we currently believe
about, say, our moral or political arrangements is actually false. We are
prone, for example, to think that the concept of individual responsibility is
indispensable to any satisfactory moral code. But Adkins’ analysis of ancient
Greek values casts considerable doubt on that article of faith.227 We are
prone to think that there can be no concept of the state in the absence of centralized systems of power. But Geertz’s study of classical Bali shows how the
one is perfectly possible in the absence of the other.228 We are prone to think
that there can be no theory of individual liberty in the absence of a theory of
rights. But my own studies of Roman and Renaissance moral thought similarly try to show that there is no necessary connection between the two.22?
   The alien character of these beliefs constitutes their ‘relevance’. Reflecting
on such alternative possibilities, we provide ourselves with one of the
best means of preventing our current moral and political theories from
degenerating into uncritically accepted ideologies.23° At the same time,
we equip ourselves with a new means of looking critically at our own
beliefs in the light of the enlarged sense of possibility we acquire.
   A resurgent conservatism tells us that this is merely another way of
proclaiming the relativity of all values, and thus of leaving us bereft of
any values at all.23! This seems to me as far as possible from the truth. The
kind of enquiries I am describing offer us an additional means of reflecting
on what we believe, and thus of strengthening our present beliefs by way
of testing them against alternative possibilities, or else of improving them if
we come to recognize that the alternatives are both possible and desirable.
As I have already stressed, a willingness to engage in this kind of reflection
seems to me a distinguishing feature of all rational agents. To denounce
such studies is not a defence of reason but an assault on the open society.
   The other point I wish to make in justification of my approach is more
specific to the discipline of intellectual history. Although the concepts we
investigate as historians of western thought are often highly unfamiliar, our
own concepts nevertheless evolved out of them.?? This suggests that the
‘purely historical’ study of social and political thought may prove to have
a further relevance. Suppose we have the patience to go back to the start
of our own history and find out in detail how it developed. This will not

=== p. 288 ===

only enable us to illuminate the changing applications of our key concepts;
it will also enable us to uncover the points at which they may have become
confused or misunderstood in a way that marked their’subsequent history.
And if we can do this — as Tuck, for example, has shown in the case of
our theories about natural rights — we can hope not merely to illuminate
but to dissolve some of our current philosophical perplexities.233 Again,
it is only by refusing the vulgar demand for relevance that we can
hope to indicate the serious way in which the study of intellectual
history is indeed relevant to the assessment of our present beliefs.

                                   Vill

I cannot end without thanking my critics (bewilderingly vituperative though
some of them have been). They have shown me a number of points where I
have argued with insufficient clarity, and a number of points where I have
either misstated or overstated my case. They have thereby prompted me
to reconsider my whole argument, and to recast it in a more systematic
and, I hope, a more lucid style. What they have not succeeded in showing
me, however, is that my basic approach to textual interpretation is in
any fundamental way misconceived. To end, as I began, with Thomas
Hobbes, I am bound to say that ‘as to the whole doctrine, I see not yet,
but the principles of it are true and proper, and the ratiocination solid’.

