=== chunk: tully-1988-meaning-and-context/ch2-meaning-and-understanding ===
title: Meaning and understanding in the history of ideas
source_pdf: docs/sources/tully-1988-meaning-and-context/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 43-81
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 29
plan_page_end: 67
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 29 ===

   Meaning and understanding in the
           history of ideas

My aim is to consider what | take to be the basic question which
necessarily arises whenever an historian of ideas! confronts a work which
he hopes to understand. Such an historian may have focused his attention
on a work of literature — a poem, a play, a novel — or on a work of
philosophy — some    exercise in ethical, political, religious, or other such
mode of thought. But the basic question will in all such cases remain
the same: what are the appropriate procedures to adopt in the attempt
to arrive at an understanding of the work? There are of course two
currently orthodox (though conflicting) answers to this question, both of
which seem to command a wide acceptance. The first (which is perhaps
being increasingly adopted by historians of ideas) insists that it is the
context ‘of religious, political, and economic factors’ which determines the
meaning of any given text, and so must provide ‘the ultimate framework’
for any attempt to understand it. The other orthodoxy, however (still
perhaps the most generally accepted), insists on the autonomy of the
text itself as the sole necessary key to its own meaning, and so dismisses
any attempt to reconstitute the ‘total context’ as ‘gratuitous, and worse’.
   My concern in what follows will be to consider these two orthodoxies
in turn, and to argue that both in effect share the same basic inadequacy:
neither approach seems a sufficient or even appropriate means of achieving
a proper understanding of any given literary or philosophical work.
Both methodologies, it can be shown, commit philosophical mistakes
in the assumptions they make about the conditions necessary for the
understanding of utterances. It follows that the result of accepting either
orthodoxy has been to fill the current literature in the history of ideas
with a series of conceptual muddles and mistaken empirical claims.

=== p. 30 ===

            The attempt to substantiate this assertion must necessarily be somewhat
         critical and negative. I undertake it here, however, in the belief that it
         can be shown to yield much more positive and programmatic conclusions; for the nature of the current confusions in the history of ideas
         points not merely to the need for an alternative approach, but also
         indicates what type of approach must necessarily be adopted if such
         confusions are to be avoided. I believe that this alternative approach
         would be more satisfactory as history, and moreover that it would
         serve to invest the history of ideas with its own philosophical point.

         I turn first to consider the methodology dictated by the claim that the text
         itself should form the self-sufficient object of inquiry and understanding. For
         it is this assumption which continues to govern the largest number of studies,
         to raise the widest philosophical issues, and to give rise to the largest number
         of confusions. This approach itself is logically tied, in the history of ideas no
         less than in more strictly literary studies, to a particular form of justification
         for conducting the study itself. The whole point, it is characteristically
         said, of studying past works of philosophy (or literature) must be that
         they contain (in a favoured phrase) ‘timeless elements’,? in the form of
         ‘universal ideas’,+ even a ‘dateless wisdom’> with ‘universal _application’.®
            Now the historian who adopts such a view has already committed
         himself, in effect, on the question of how best to gain an understanding
         of such ‘classic texts’.? For if the whole point of such a study is conceived
         in terms of recovering the ‘timeless questions and answers’ posed in the
         ‘great books’, and so of demonstrating their continuing ‘relevance’,® it
         must be not merely possible, but essential, for the historian to concentrate
         simply on what each of the classic writers has said? about each of these
         ‘fundamental concepts’ and ‘abiding questions’.!° The aim, in short, must
         be to provide ‘a re-appraisal of the classic writings, quite apart from the
                     .   ia          .                 .    .   .      .    aot

         context of historical development, as_perennially important attempts to.
         set down universal propositions about political reality’.11 For to suggest
         instead that a knowledge of the social context is a necessary condition
         for an understanding of the classic texts is equivalent to denying that they
         do contain any elements of timeless and perennial interest, and is thus
         equivalent to removing the whole point of studying what they said.
            It is this essential belief that each of the classic writers may be expected
Ss
cr       to consider and explicate some determinate set of ‘fundamental concepts’
         of ‘perennial interest’ which seems to be the basic source of the confusions

<A
     5 engendered by this approach to studying the history of either literary or
      <>
         philosophical ideas. The sense in which the belief is misleading, however,
                 ;                        ae
       ee                          oe                      Nad

=== p. 31 ===

                         Meaning and understanding                           ol
appears to be somewhat elusive. It is easy to castigate the assumption as ‘a
 atal mistake’,!? but it is equally easy to insist that it must in some sense be
a necessary truth. For there can be no question that the histories ofdifferent
intellectual pursuits are marked by the employment of some ‘fairly stable
vocabulary’! of characteristic concepts. Even if we hold to the fashionably
loose-textured theory that it is only in virtue of certain ‘family resemblances’
that we are able to define and delineate such different activities, we are still
committed to accepting some criteria and rules of usage such that certain
performances can be correctly instanced, and others excluded, as examples
of a given activity. Otherwise we should eventually have no means — let
alone justification — for delineating and speaking, say, of the histories of
ethical or political thinking as being histories of recognizable activities at
all. It is in fact the truth, and not the absurdity, of the claim that all such
activities must have some characteristic concepts which seems to provide
the main source of confusion. For if there must be at least some family
resemblance connecting all the instances of a given activity, which we need
first of all to apprehend in order to recognize the activity itself, it becomes
impossible for any observer to consider any such activity, or any instance of
it, without having some preconceptions about what he expects to find.
   The relevance of this dilemma to the history of ideas — and especially to
the claim that the historian should concentrate simply on the text in itself— is
of course that it will never in fact be possible simply to study what any given
classic writer Foes PERRI              a               ee ging to
bear some of one’s own expectations about what he must have been saying.
This is simply the dilemma, familiar to psychologists as the (apparently
inescapable)!4 determining factor of the observer’s mental set. By our past
experience ‘we are set to perceive details in a certain way’. And when
this frame of reference has been established, ‘the process is one of being
prepared to perceive or react in a certain way’.!5 The resulting dilemma may
be stated, for my present purposes, in the formally crucial but empirically
very elusive proposition that these models andpreconceptions imterms of
which we unavoidably organize_and adjust our perceptions and thoughts
will themselves tend to act as determinants of what we think or perceive.
We must classify in order to understand, and we can only classify the
                                                                                   i
unfamiliar in terms of the familiar.'® The perpetual danger, in our attempts
to enlarge our historical understanding, is thus that our expectations about
what someone must be saying or doing will themselves determine that we
understand the agent to be doing something which he would not — or even
could not — himself have accepted as an account of what he was doing.
    This notion of the priority of paradigms has already been very fruitfully
explored in the history of art,!7 where it has caused an essentially historicist
story which traced the development of illusionism to yield place to a stor

               Eaicilermuwent tol cond-oand avtonomy,

=== p. 32 ===

recently an analogous exploration has been made with some plausibility
in the history of science.!8 Here I shall attempt to apply a similar set of
concepts to the history of ideas. My procedure will be to uncover the extent
to which the current historical study of ethical, political, religious, and other
such ideas is contaminated by the unconscious application of paradigms the
familiarity of which, to the historian, disguises an essential inapplicability
to the past. I do not, of course, seek to deny that the methodology which
I am concerned to criticize has occasionally yielded distinguished results.
I do wish, however, both to insist on the various ways in which to study
simply what each classic writer says is unavoidably to run the perpetual
danger of lapsing into various kinds of historical absurdity, and also to
anatomize the various ways in which the results may in consequence be
classified not as histories at all, but more appropriately as mythologies.
    The most persistent mythology is generated when the historian is set
by the expectation that each classic writer (in the history, say, of ethical
or political ideas) will be found to enunciate some doctrine on each of
the topics regarded as constitutive of his subject. It is a dangerously
short step from being under the influence (however unconsciously) of
such a paradigm to ‘finding’ a given author’s doctrines on all the
mandatory themes. The (very frequent) result is a type of discussion
which might be labelled the mythology of doctrines.
    This mythology takes several forms. First, there is the danger of
converting some scattered. or quite incidental remarks by a classic theorist
into his ‘doctrine’ on one of the mandatory themes. This in turn can be
shown to generate two particular types of historical absurdity, one more
characteristic of intellectual biographies and the more synoptic histories of
thought, in which the focus is on the individual thinkers (or the procession
of them), and the other more characteristic of actual ‘histories of ideas’,
in which the focus is on the development of some given ‘idea’ itself.
    The particular danger with intellectual biography is that of sheer
anachronism. A given writer may be ‘discovered’ to have held a view, on
the strength of some chance similarity of terminology, on some subject
to which he cannot in principle have meant to contribute. Marsilius of
 Padua, for example, at one point in his Defender of the Peace offers some
 typically Aristotelian remarks on the executive role of a ruler, compared
 with the legislative role of a sovereign people.!? The modern commentator
 who comes upon this passage will of course be familiar with the doctrine,
 important in constitutional theory and practice since the American Revolution, that one of the conditions of political freedom is the separation
 of executive from legislative power. The historical origins of the doctrine
 itself can be traced2° to the historiographical suggestion (first canvassed
 some two centuries after Marsilius’s death) that the development of the
 Roman Republic into an Empire demonstrated the danger to the liberty of

=== p. 33 ===

                        Meaning and understanding                           255)
subjects inherent in entrusting any single authority with centralized political
power. Marsilius, of course, knew nothing of this historiography, nor of the
lessons that were to be drawn from it. (His own discussion in fact derives
from Book IV of Aristotle’s Politics, and is not even concerned with the
issue of political freedom.) None of this, however, has been sufficient to
prevent a brisk and wholly meaningless debate on the question of whether
Marsilius should be said to have had a ‘doctrine’ of the separation of
powers, and if so whether he should be ‘acclaimed the founder of the
doctrine’.2! And even those experts who have denied that Marsilius should
be credited with this doctrine have based their conclusions on his text,22
and not at all    by pointing to the impropriety of supposing that he could
have meant to contribute to a debate the terms of which were unavailable
to him, and the point of which would have been lost on him. The same
anachronism marks the discussion which has centred around the famous
dictum offered by Sir Edward Coke on Bonham’s case, to the effect that
the common law of England may sometimes override statute. The modern
(especially American) commentator brings to this remark all the much later
resonances of the doctrine of judicial review. Coke himself — like everyone
in the seventeenth century — knew nothing of such a doctrine. (The context
of his own suggestion is very much that of aparty politician assuring James
I that the defining characteristic of law is custom, and not, as James was
already claiming, the_will of the sovereign.)?3 None of these historical
considerations, however, has been enough to prevent the reiteration of
the wholly meaningless question of ‘whether Coke actually intended to
advocate judicial review’,2* or the insistence that Coke must have meant to
articulate this ‘new doctrine’ and so to make this ‘remarkable contribution
to political science’.25 Again, moreover, those experts who have denied that
Coke should be credited with such clairvoyance have based their conclusion
on the historico-legal reinterpretation of Coke’s text,?¢ rather than attacking
the prior logical oddity of the implied account of Coke’s intentions.
   Besides this crude possibility of crediting a writer with a meanin he.               nth
could not have intended to convey, since that meaning was not available         Whew
to him, there is also the (perhaps more insidious) danger of too readily,’
                                                 .    .    .   .                   "\         }
                                           .

‘reading in’ a doctrine which a given writer might in principle have meant PRA id
ae le eh Pee   .    .      .       .

to state, but in fact had no intention to convey. Consider for example
the remarks which Richard Hooker makes in The Laws of Ecclesiastical
Polity (book I, chap.X, section 4) about the natural sociability of man.
We might well feel that Hooker’s intention (what he meant to do) was
merely — as with so many scholastic lawyers at the time who mentioned
the point — to discriminate the godly origins of the Church from the more
mundane origins of the state. The modern commentator, however, who
inescapably sees Hooker at the top of a ‘line of descent’ running ‘from
Hooker to Locke and from Locke to the Philosophes’ has little difficulty

=== p. 34 ===

in converting Hooker’s remarks into nothing less than his ‘theory of the
social contract’.27 Similarly, consider the scattered remarks on trusteeship
which John Locke offers at one or two points (paras 149, 155) in the
Second Treatise. We might well feel that Locke merely intended to appeal
to one of the most familiar legal analogies in the political writing of the
time. Again, however, the modern commentator who sees Locke standing
at the head of tradition of ‘government by consent’ has little difficulty in
piecing together the ‘passages scattered through’ the work on this topic,
and emerging with nothing less than Locke’s ‘doctrine’ of ‘the political
trust’.28 And similarly, consider the remarks James Harrington makes
in Oceana about the place of lawyers in political life. The historian
who is looking (perhaps, in this case, quite properly) for the views
of the Harringtonian Republicans on the separation of powers may be
momentarily disconcerted to find that Harrington (‘curiously’) is not even
talking about public officers at this point. But if he ‘knows’ to expect the
doctrine among this group, he will have little difficulty in insisting that
‘this does seem to be a vague statement of the doctrine’.2? In all such
cases, where a given writer may appear to intimate some ‘doctrine’ in
something that he says, we are left confronting the same essential and
essentially begged question: if all the writers are claimed to have meant to
articulate the doctrine with which they are being credited, why is it that
they so signally failed to do so, so that the historian is left reconstructing
their implied intentions from guesses and vague hints? The only plausible
answer is of course fatal to the claim itself: that the author did not
(or even could not) have meant after all to enunciate such a doctrine.
   This same tendency for the paradigms applied to the history of ideas
to cause its subject matter to mutate into a mythology of doctrines can
also be illustrated, in a rather different way, from those ‘histories of
ideas’ in which the aim (in the words of Professor Lovejoy, a pioneer of
the approach) is to trace the morphology of some given doctrine ‘through
all the provinces of history in which it appears’.3° The characteristic point
of departure in such histories is to set out an ideal type of the given
doctrine — whether it is the doctrine of equality, progress, Machiavellism,
the social contract, the great chain of being, the separation of powers,
and so on. The particular danger with this approach is that the doctrine
to be investigated so readily becomes hypostatized into an entity. As the
historian duly sets out in quest of the idea he has characterized, he is
very readily led to speak as if the fully developed form of the doctrine
was always in some sense immanent in history, even if various thinkers
failed to ‘hit upon’ it,>! even if it ‘dropped from sight’ at various times,32
even if an entire era failed (note the implication that they tried) to ‘rise
to a consciousness’ of it.33 Similarly, the story of the development of
such a doctrine very readily takes on the kind of language appropriate

=== p. 35 ===

to the description of a growing organism. The fact that ideas         presuppose
agents is very readily discounted, as the ideas get up and do battle on
their own behalf. Thus we may be told that the ‘birth’ of the idea of
progress was quite easy, for it had ‘transcended’ the ‘obstacles to its
appearance’ by the sixteenth century,34 and so ‘gained ground’ through
the next hundred years.35 But the idea of the separation of powers had
a harder time, for though it nearly managed to ‘emerge’ during the
English civil war, it ‘never quite managed fully to materialize’, so that it
took another century ‘from the English civil war until the mid-eighteenth
century for a three-fold division to emerge fully and take over’.3¢
   The reification of doctrines in this way gives rise in turn to two kinds
of historical absurdity, both of which are not merely prevalent in this
type of history, but seem more or less inescapable when its methodology
is employed. First, the tendency to search for approximations to the ideal
type yields a form of non-history which is almost entirely        given over
to_pointing out earlier ‘anticipations’ of later doctrines, and to crediting
each writer in terms of this clairvoyance. So Marsilius is notable for his
Saha ableieateigarciehs Giviachiar alias Machiavelli is notable because
he ‘lays the foundation for Marx’;38 Locke’s theory of signs is notable ‘as
an anticipation of Berkeley’s metaphysics’;3? Glanvill’s theory of causation
is notable for ‘the extent to which he has anticipated Hume’;#° Shaftesbury’s
treatment of the theodicy problem is notable because it ‘in a certain sense
anticipated Kant’.4! Sometimes even the pretence that this is history is laid
aside, and the writers of the past are simply praised or blamed according to
how far they may seem to have aspired to the condition of being ourselves.
Montesquieu ‘anticipates the ideas of full employment and the welfare
state’: this shows his ‘luminous, incisive’ mind.42 Machiavelli thought
about politics essentially as we do: this is his ‘lasting significance’. But
his contemporaries did not: this makes their political views ‘completely
unreal’.43 Shakespeare (‘an eminently political author’) was sceptical about
‘the possibility of an interracial, interfaith society’; this is one of the signs
of his value as ‘a text in moral and political education’.44+ And so on.
   The second historical absurdity generated _by the methodology of the
history of ideas is the endless debate — almost wholly semantic, though
posing as empirical — about whether a given idea may be said to have
‘really emerged’ at a given time, and whether it is ‘really there’ in the
work of some given writer. Consider again the histories of the doctrine of
the separation of powers. Is the doctrine, they ask, perhaps already ‘there’
in the works of George Buchanan? No, for he ‘did not fully articulate’ it,
although ‘none came closer’.45 But is it perhaps ‘there’ by the time of the
Royalists’ Defence of 1648? No, for it is still ‘not the pure doctrine’.
Or consider the histories of the doctrine of the social contract. Is the
doctrine perhaps already ‘there’ in the pamphlets of the Huguenots? No,

=== p. 36 ===

for their ideas are ‘incompletely developed’ (note again the unargued
assumption that they are trying to develop the doctrine). But is it perhaps
‘there’ in the works    of their Catholic rivals? No, for their statements
are still ‘incomplete’, although they are ‘decidedly more advanced’.47

The first form, then, of the mythology of doctrines may be said to consist,
in these various ways, of mistaking some scattered or incidental remarks by
one of the classic theorists for his ‘doctrine’ on one of the themes which the
historian is set to expect. The second form of the mythology, to which I now
turn, may be said to be the converse of this mistake. Here a classic theorist
who fairly clearly does fail to come up with a recognizable doctrine on
one of the mandatory themes is then criticized for his failure to do so.
   The historical study of ethical and political ideas is dogged currently
by a demonological (but highly influential) version of this mistake. Ethical
and political theory, it is said, is or ought to be concerned with eternal
or a least traditional ‘true standards’.4® It is thus thought appropriate
to treat the history of these subjects in terms of the ‘decided lowering
of tone’ said to be characteristic of modern reflection ‘on life and its
goals’, and to take as the focus of this history the assessment of blame
for this collapse.4? Hobbes, or sometimes     Machiavelli, is then made to
stand condemned for man’s first disobedience.5° Their contemporaries
are then suitably praised or blamed essentially according to whether they
acknowledged or subverted the same ‘truth’.5! The chief proponent of
this approach, confronted with Machiavelli’s political works, thus ‘does
not hesitate to assert’ that Machiavelli’s teaching is to be denounced as
‘immoral and irreligious’.52 He also does not hesitate to assume that such
a tone of denunciation is perfectly appropriate to the stated aim of trying
to ‘understand’ Machiavelli’s works.53 Here the paradigm accepted for
the nature of ethical and political thought determines the direction of the
whole historical investigation. The history can only be reinterpreted if the
paradigm itself is abandoned. Quite apart from the question of whether
the paradigm is a suitable one to apply to the past, this is in itself
an astonishing impasse for any historical investigation to have reached.
     The main version, however, of this form of the mythology    of doctrines

discuss. Sometimes this aT             SSE           CTT ke
great men said to some speculation about a topic they did not mention.
Aquinas may not have pronounced on the subject of ‘foolish “civil
disobedience”’,    but surely ‘he would not have approved’.5+ Similarly,
Marsilius would surely approve of democracy, since ‘the sovereignty he
espoused pertained to the people’.5° But Hooker ‘would not be entirely
happy’ with democracy, since ‘his own noble religious and spacious

=== p. 37 ===

conception   of law has been desiccated into the mere          fiat of popular
will’.°¢ Such exercises may seem merely quaint, but they         could always
have a more sinister undertone, as these examples may seem to suggest:
a means to fix one’s can              ee        eae       oe          ane
under the guise of innocuous historical speculation. History then indeed
becomes _a_pack of tricks we play on the dead. The most usual strategy,
however, is to seize on some doctrine which the given theorist, it is in effect
claimed, ought to have mentioned, although he failed to do so, and then
to criticize him for this so-called omission. Perhaps the most remarkable
evidence of the hold of this most essentialist approach is that it was never
questioned, as a method of discussing the history of political ideas, even
by the most anti-essentialist of all contemporary political theorists, T. D.
Weldon. The first part of his book on States and Morals sets out the various
‘definitions of the State’ which political theorists all ‘either formulate or
take for granted’. It is thus established that ‘all theories of the State fall
   . Into two main groups. Some define it as a kind of organism, others
as a kind of machine’. Armed with this discovery, Weldon then turns ‘to
examine the leading theories about the state which have been put forward’.
But here we find that even ‘those writers who are generally regarded as
the leading theorists in the subject’ let us down rather badly, for very
few of them manage to expound either of the two theories without
‘inconsistencies   or even   contradictions’.   Hegel, indeed, turns out to be
the sole theorist ‘completely faithful’ to one of the two stipulated models
which, we are reminded, it is the ‘primary purpose’ of each theorist to
expound. A less confident writer might well have wondered at this point
whether his initial characterization of what all these theorists ought to
be doing can possibly have been correct. But Weldon’s only comment
is that it seems ‘rather odd that, after more than two thousand years
of concentrated thought’ they are still in such complete confusion.5”? The
exegetical literature is filled, moreover, with this type of more or less
unselfconscious critical application of the mythology of doctrines. Consider,
for example, the place in political thought of questions about the process
of voting and decision-making, and public opinion generally — questions
of some importance in recent democratic political theory, though of very
little interest to theorists writing before the establishment of modern representative democracies. The historical caveat might scarcely seem worth
adding, but it has not in fact been enough to prevent commentators from
                                                                            ;5*
criticizing Plato’s Republic for ‘omitting’ the ‘influence of public opinion’
or from criticizing Locke’s Second Treatise for omitting ‘all references to
family and race’, and for failing to make it ‘wholly clear’ where he stands
on the question of universal suffrage;5° or from regarding it as remarkable
that not one of ‘the great writers on politics and law’ devoted any space
to the discussion of decision-making.°° Consider, similarly, the question of

=== p. 38 ===

the social basis of political power — a question of great importance, again,
in current democratic theory, though of little relevance to the theorists of
pre-industrial society. Again the historical caveat is obvious, but again it has
not been sufficient to prevent commentators from offering it as a criticism of
Machiavelli,o! of Hobbes,®2 and of Locke, that none of them offers any
‘genuine insights’6+ into this almost wholly twentieth-century discussion.
   A scarcely less futile and even more prevalent form of this mythology
consists in effect of criticizing the classic writers according to the — wholly
a priori — assumption that they must have intended whatever writings they
produced to constitute the most systematic contributions to their subject
which they were capable of executing. If it is first assumed, for example,
that one of the doctrines which Hooker (that most implausible runner in
the classic race) must have been trying to enunciate in the Laws was an
account of ‘the basis of political obligation’, then it is doubtless a ‘defect
in Hooker’s political views’ that he fails to devote any attention to
refuting claims to absolute power.®> Similarly, if it is first assumed that
one of Machiavelli’s basic concerns in the Prince is ‘the characteristics
of men in politics’, then it is not hard for a modern political scientist to
go on to point out that as such, Machiavelli’s poor effort is “extremely
one-sided and unsystematic’.6® Again, if it is first assumed that Locke’s
Two Treatises include all the doctrines he might have wished to enunciate
on ‘natural law and political society’, then doubtless ‘it might well be
asked’ why Locke failed to ‘advocate a world state’.6”? And again, if
it is first assumed that one of Montesquieu’s aims in L’Esprit des lois
must have been to enunciate a sociology of knowledge, then doubtless
‘it is a weakness’ that he fails to explain its chief determinants, and
doubtless ‘we must also accuse him’ of failing to apply his own theory.’
But with all such alleged ‘failures’, as with the converse form of this
mythology, we are still — remembering that failing presupposes trying
— left confronting the same essential and essentially begged question: the
question of whether any of these writers ever intended, or even could
have intended, to do what they are thus castigated for not having done.

I now turn to the second type of mythology which tends to be generated
by the fact that the historian will be unavoidably set in approaching the
ideas of the past. It may be (and indeed it very often happens) that a given
classic writer is not altogether consistent, or even that he fails altogether
to give any systematic account of his beliefs. If the basic paradigm for the
conduct of the historical investigation has been conceived as the elaboration
of each classic writer’s doctrines on each of the themes most characteristic
of the subject, it will become dangerously easy for the historian to conceive
it as his task to supply or find in each of these texts the coherence which
they may appear to lack. Such a danger is exacerbated, of course, by the

=== p. 39 ===

                         Meaning and understanding                            Bg
notorious difficulty of preserving the proper emphasis and tone of a work
in_paraphrasing it, and by the consequent temptation to find a ‘message’
which can be abstracted from it and more readily communicated. Io
write a textbook in the history of ideas, of course, is simply to fall prey
 systematically to this temptation ——_———
                                       which, incidentally, is why textbooks
in the subject are not merely poor things, but are actively misleading, and
why this difficulty is not to be circumvented even by providing textbooks
 in which the ‘message’ is given in the author’s own words. The inevitable
result — which can be illustrated from far more respectable sources than the
 synoptic and pedagogic histories — will still be a form of writing which might
 be labelled the mythology of coherence. The writing of the history of ethical
 and political philosophy is pervaded by this mythology.®? Thus if ‘current
 scholarly opinion’ can see no coherence in Hooker’s Laws, the moral is to
 look harder, for ‘coherence’ is surely ‘present’.7° If there is doubt about the
 ‘most central themes’ of Hobbes’ political philosophy, it becomes the duty
of the exegete to discover the ‘inner coherence of his doctrine’ by reading
the Leviathan a number of times, until — in a perhaps excessively revealing
phrase — he finds that its argument has ‘assumed some coherence’.7! If
there is no coherent system ‘readily accessible’ to the student of Hume’s
political works, the exegete’s duty is ‘to rummage through one work after
another’ until the ‘high degree of consistency in the whole corpus’ is duly
displayed (again in a rather revealing phrase) ‘at all costs’.’* If Herder’s
political ideas are ‘rarely worked out systematically’, and are to be found
‘scattered throughout his writings, sometimes within the most unexpected
contexts’, the duty of the exegete again becomes that of trying ‘to present
these ideas in some coherent form’.73 The most revealing fact about such
reiterations of the scholar’s task is that the metaphors habitually used are
those of effort and quest; the ambition is always to ‘arrive’ at ‘a unified
interpretation’, to ‘gain’ a ‘coherent view of an author’s system’.”4
   This procedure gives the thoughts of various classic writers a coherence,
and an air generally of a closed system, which they may never have attained
or even been meant to attain. If it is first assumed, for example, that the
business of interpreting Rousseau’s thought must centre on the discovery
of his most ‘fundamental thought’, it will readily cease to seem a matter
of importance that he contributed over several decades to several quite
different fields of enquiry.75 Again, if it is first assumed that every aspect
of Hobbes’ thought was designed as a contribution to the whole of his
‘Christian’ system, it will cease to seem at all peculiar to suggest that
we may turn to his autobiography to elucidate so crucial a point as the
relations between ethics and political life.7° Again, if it is first assumed that
even Burke never essentially contradicted himself or changed his mind, but
that a ‘coherent moral philosophy’ underlies everything he wrote, then it
will cease to seem at all unrealistic to treat ‘the corpus of his published

=== p. 40 ===

writings’ as ‘a single body of thought’.’7 Some measure of the lengths to
which such procedures of abstracting the variety of a man’s thoughts to
the level at which they can be said (all passion spent) to ‘attain’ some
coherence is provided by a recent study of Marx’s social and political
thought. Here it has seemed necessary, to justify the exclusion of Engels’
thoughts, to point out that Marx and Engels were after all ‘two distinct
human beings’.78 It does sometimes happen, of course, that the aims
and successes of a given writer may remain so various as to defy even
the efforts of such exegetes to find a coherent system in their scattered
thoughts. Frequently, however, this merely generates the converse form
of this historical absurdity: for such lack of system is then made a
matter for reproach. It is thought, for example, to be a point of some
ideological urgency as well as exegetical convenience that Marx’s various
pronouncements should be available under some systematic headings.
Despite the efforts of his critics, however, such a system remains hard to
find. We might ascribe this to his concern at different times with a wide
range of different social and economic issues. But it has instead become a
standard criticism in the textbooks that Marx never managed to work out
what is supposed to be ‘his’ basic theory in anything but a ‘fragmentary
manner’.”? Such criticisms occur even more readily when the given writer
is first classified according to a model to which he is then in effect expected
to aspire. If it is first assumed that all conservative thinkers must hold some
‘organic’ conception of the state, then doubtless Bolingbroke ‘should have
had’ such a conception, and doubtless it is odd that he did not organize
his thoughts in this approved way.8° Again, if it is first assumed that each
philosopher who writes about justice may be expected to ‘contribute’ to
one of three ‘basic’ views on the subject, then doubtless the fact that
neither Plato nor Hegel did so can be taken to show that they ‘seem to
resist taking a definite position’ on the subject itself.8! In all such cases,
the coherence or lack of it which is thus discovered very readily ceases to
be an historical account of any thoughts which were ever actually thought.
The history thus written becomes a history not of ideas at all, but of
abstractions: a history of thoughts which no one ever actually succeeded
in thinking, at a level of coherence which no one ever actually attained.
   The objection is a very obvious one, but it has not in practice proved
sufficient to forestall the development of this mythology        of coherence in
two directions which can only, in the most pejorative sense, be called
metaphysical. First there is the astonishing, but not unusual, assumption
that it may be quite proper, in the interests of extracting a message of
 higher coherence from an author’s work, to discount the statements of
 intention which the author himself may have made about what he was
 doing, or even to discount whole works which would impair the coherence
 of the author’s system. The current literature on both Hobbes and Locke

=== p. 41 ===

may be used to illustrate both these tendencies. In the case of Locke, it
is now known that he was concerned, in his earliest works of ethical
and political thinking, to set out and to defend a markedly authoritarian
position.®? Yet it is still apparently possible in the face of this knowledge
to treat Locke’s politics as a body of views which can simply be labelled
the work of a ‘liberal’ political theorist, without further consideration of
the fact that these were at best the views which Locke held in his fifties,
and which he would himself have repudiated in his thirties.83 Locke at
thirty is evidently not yet ‘Locke’ — a degree of patriarchalism to which
even Filmer did not aspire. As for Hobbes, it is known from his own
explicit statements what character he intended his political thought to bear.
Leviathan, as he put it in the review and Conclusion, was written ‘without
other design’ than to show first that the ‘civil right of sovereigns and both
the duty and liberty of subjects’ could be grounded ‘upon the known
natural inclinations of mankind’, and second, that a theory so grounded
would centre on ‘the mutual relation of protection and obedience’: a
politics of rational calculation is thus predicated on something like an
assimilation of politics to psychology.84 Yet it has still seemed possible
to insist that this ‘scientific part’ of Hobbes’s thought is nothing more
than a rather ineptly detached aspect of a transcendent ‘religious whole’.
The fact, moreover, that Hobbes himself appeared unaware of this high
order of coherence provokes not retraction but counter-assertion. Hobbes
merely ‘fails to make clear’ that his discussion of human nature ‘in fact’
subserves a religious purpose. It ‘would have been clearer’ if Hobbes had
‘written in terms of moral and civil obligations’ and thus brought out
the ‘real unity’ and basically religious character of his whole ‘system’.85

The other metaphysical belief to which the mythology of coherence
gives rise is that a writer may be expected not merely to exhibit some
‘inner coherence’ which it becomes the duty of his interpreter to reveal,
but also that any apparent barriers to this revelation, constituted by any
apparent contradictions which the given writer’s work does seem to contain,
cannot be real barriers, because they cannot really be contradictions. The
assumption, that is, is that the correct question to ask in such a doubtful
situation is not whether the given writer was inconsistent, but rather
‘How are his contradictions (or apparent contradictions) to be accounted
for?’86 The explanation dictated by the principle of Ockham’s razor (that
an apparent contradiction may simply be a contradiction) seems not to be
considered. Such apparent incompatibilities, it is often said instead, should
not simply be left in this unresolved state, but should be made to setve
instead in helping towards ‘a fuller understanding of the whole theory’’’ —
of which the contradictions, presumably, form only an unsublimated part.
The very suggestion, indeed, that the ‘contradictions and divergences’ of

=== p. 42 ===

      a given writer may be ‘supposed to prove that his thought had changed’
      has been dismissed by a very influential authority as just another delusion
      of nineteenth-century scholarship.88 So it comes about that much current
      practice in the history of ideas deliberately endorses one of the more
      fantastic doctrines of the scholastics themselves: the belief that one must
      ‘resolve antinomies’. The aim, for example, in studying the politics of
      Machiavelli need not therefore be restricted to anything so straightforward
a , | as an attempt to indicate the nature of the developments and divergences
 eS)  from The Prince to the later Discourses. It can be — and has been — insisted
S|    instead that the appropriate task must be to construct for Machiavelli a
Rua   scheme of beliefs sufficiently generalized for the doctrines of The Prince to
ps    be capable of being aufgehoben into the Discourses with all the apparent
“ U&       contradictions resolved.89 The recent historiography of Marx’s social and
:    -s%, political thought reveals a similar trend. Marx is not allowed simply to
5          have developed and changed his views from the humanistic strains of the
    oe     Economic—Philosophical    Manuscripts to the apparently very different, far
vere?     more mechanistic, system outlined over twenty years later in Capital. Either
tS        it is assumed that the appropriate task must be to construct ‘a structural
  eS, analysis of the whole of Marx’s thought’ so that the apparent divergences
cSA)      can be viewed as part of ‘one corpus’,?° or else it is assumed that the very
  ye existence of the earlier material can be used as a basis for claiming that
          ‘the element of myth’ must still somehow be present in the later works,
a a that this shows Marx to have been ‘obsessed with a moral vision of
GU        reality’ all the time, and that all of this can be used to discredit Marx’s
Ry    coe ee pretensions, since he ‘appears not as the scientist of society that
we,§7) xy he claimed to be, but rather as a moralist or religious kind of thinker’.?!
we :          It is true that this belief in the desirability of trying to resolve contraSt cS     dictions has recently received an explicit and interesting defence. The clue,
          it is suggested, to understanding any apparent ‘blunders’ committed by any
rosSor master of the art of writing’ lies in recognizing the effects of persecution
yO ‘© on the art of writing. During any ‘era of persecution’ it becomes necessary
          to hide one’s less orthodox views ‘between the lines’ of one’s published
x         work. (“The expression’, one learns with relief, ‘is clearly metaphoric.’) It
  ye       follows that if ‘an able writer’ in such a situation appears to contradict
>          himself in setting out his ostensible views, then ‘we may reasonably suspect’
sr é that the apparent contradiction has been deliberately planted as a signal
  Sart, to his ‘trustworthy and intelligent’ readers that he is really opposed to
ec         the orthodox views he may appear to hold.?? The basic difficulty with
           this defence of the practice of resolving antinomies is that it depends on
 Ys        two 4 priori assumptions which, although they are extremely implausible,
es         are not merely left unargued, but are treated as if they are ‘facts’. First,
:          the inquiry gains its whole direction from the unargued assumption that
  +.       to be original is to be subversive. For this is the means by which we

=== p. 43 ===

  know when to look for writing between the lines. And second, any given
  interpretation based on reading between thelines isvirtually insulated from
  criticism by the alleged ‘fact’ that ‘thoughtless men are careless readers’.93
 Pian leeay Giseeun eapure ischaemia acre etl sein:
  message between the lines is to be thoughtless, while to ‘see’ it is to be
  a trustworthy and intelligent reader. But if we now insist on some more
  genuinely empirical criteria for knowing when we are or are not dealing
  with one of the relevant ‘eras of persecution’, and for knowing when in
  consequence we should or should not try to read between the lines, all
  that we find are two circular arguments. When should we stop trying to
  read between the lines? The only criterion given is ‘when it would be less
  exact than not doing so’.?4 And what constitutes an era of persecution,
  such that we should expect to have to read between the lines? We are
  told on the one hand ‘that the book in question must have been composed
  during a period of persecution’ if there is to be any expectation that it does
  contain secret writing. And we are told on the other hand that a period
  of persecution is to be defined as one in which a heterodox writer will
  need to develop this ‘peculiar technique of writing’ between the lines.?5
  Despite this explicit defence, therefore, of the scholasticism of resolving
  antinomies, it remains hard to see how the whole enterprise of looking for
  the ‘inner coherence’ of a given writer’s doctrines can yield anything except
  a mythology of coherence — a mythology, again, in the sense that the history
  written according to this methodology can scarcely contain any genuinely
  historical reports about thoughts that were actually thought in the past.
Wo. tis enterprise can ax Pose OST oun anachronsk¢ approadh toa tect.
Chacons +trak appuar “alo uiously "corbead.      fo 0$ May
                                                         sh haut           sed tesot
an sacdier asthot ymmbrsed in emt                 cadegsrias and ober sbancndl
Reesumetions.
 Both the two mythologies I have ee              derive from the fact that
 an historian of ideas will unavoidably be set, in approaching any given
 writer, by some sense of the defining characteristics of the discipline
 to which the given writer may be said to have contributed. It may
 well seem, however, that even if such mythologies proliferate at this
 level of abstraction, they will scarcely arise, or will at least be very
 much easier to recognize and to discount, when the historian comes
 to operate on the level simply of describing the internal economy and
 argument of some individual work. It is indeed usual to insist that there
 can be nothing very problematic, at this more particular level, about the
 business merely of anatomizing the contents and arguments of some
 classic text. It is thus all the more necessary to insist that even at
 this level we are still confronted with further dilemmas generated by the
 priority of paradigms, and still confronted in consequence with a further
 set of ways in which historical exegesis can lapse into mythology.

=== p. 44 ===

   In the first place, it is rather easy, in considering what significance the
argument of some classic text might be said to have for us, to describe
the work and its alleged significance in such a way that no place is left
for the analysis of what the author himself meant to say, although the
commentator may still believe himself to be engaged in such an analysis.
The characteristic result of this confusion is a type of discussion which might
be labelled the mythology of prolepsis. Such confusions arise most readily,
of course, when the historian is more interested — as he may legitimately
be — in the retrospective significance of a given historical work or action
than in its meaning for the agent himself, A convenient example of the
problem which then arises is given in an important recent discussion of
such tensed situations. We might wish to say that with Petrarch’s ascent
of Mount Ventoux the age of the Renaissance began. Now this might,
in a romantic sort of way, be said to give a true account both of the
significance of Petrarch’s action, and so of its interest for us. The point
is, however, that no account under this description could ever be a true
account of any action Petrarch intended, or hence of the meaning of his
actual action. There could _be no intention ‘to open the Renaissance’, for
‘to give such a description requires concepts which were only available at a

conflation of the necessary asymmetry between the significance an observer
may justifiably claim to find in a given statement or other action, and the
meaning of that action itself. One such prolepsis which has constantly been
exposed, and yet has constantly recurred, has been the attempt to consider
Plato’s political views in The Republic    _as those of a ‘totalitarian party
politician’.2”7 Another very similar case has been the attempt to insist that
Rousseau’s political views not only ‘provided the philosophical justification
for the totalitarian as well as the democratic national state’,?? but that the
force of this ‘provision’ is such that Rousseau should in effect be credited
with just this intention, and should thus be ‘given special responsibility for
the emergence of totalitarianism’.?? In both cases an account which might be
true of the historical significance of the works becomes conflated with an
account of what they were doing which could not in principle be true.
   Such crude versions of this mythology, of course, are (and have been) very
readily exposed. But this does not seem to have been sufficient to prevent
the same type of prolepsis from continuing to recur, in a less noticeable
fashion, in discussions of other admittedly influential political theorists,
such as Machiavelli and Locke. Machiavelli, we are very often told, ‘was
the founder of the modern political orientation’.!°0 With Machiavelli ‘we
stand at the gateway of the modern world’.!°! Now this may well provide
a true account of Machiavelli’s historical significance (though it seems to
presuppose a somewhat naive view of historical causation). But this is also
frequently used to preface discussions of the characteristically ‘modern’

=== p. 45 ===

elements of Machiavelli’s thought, and is even offered as an account of
‘the intention of Machiavelli’s political teaching’.!92 The danger here is
not merely that of ‘seeing’ far too readily the ‘modern’ elements which the
commentator has thus programmed himself to find; there is also the danger
that such interpretations may part company with anything that could in
principle be a plausible account of what Machiavelli’s political writings
were meant to achieve or intended to mean. Similarly with Locke, of whom.
it is so often said (doubtless correctly) that he was one of the founders
of the modern empirical and liberal school of political philosophy. Such
a_characterization readily becomes elided into the claim that Locke was
himself _a ‘liberal’ political theorist.!°3 This only serves to turn a remark
                                                                                   HK
about Locke’s significance which might be true into a remark about the
content_of his works which could          not be true. For Locke can scarcely
have intended to contribute to a school of political philosophy which,
so this fashionable but muddled interpretation suggests, it was his great
achievement to make possible.!°* The surest symptom, in short, of this
mythology of prolepsis is that the discussions which it governs are open to
the crudest type of criticism that can be levelled against any teleological form
of explanation: the action has to await the future to await its meaning.
   Even when all these necessary historical considerations have been
given their due weight, the correct description simply of the contents and
arguments of a given classic text still poses a problem. For there is still
the possibility that the observer may misdescribe, by a process of historical
foreshortening, both the sense and the intended reference of a given work.
The result is then a mythology of parochialism. This danger must arise,
of course, in any kind of attempt to understand an alien culture or an
unfamiliar conceptual scheme. If there is to be any prospect that the observer
will successfully communicate his understanding within his own culture,

                                                                                        Divo
it is obviously dangerous, but it is equally inescapable, that he should
apply his own familiar criteria of classification and discrimination.!0> The
danger _is then that the observer may ‘see’ something apparently (rather
than_really) familiar_in the course of studying an alien argument, andqd x8
                                                                                        nN
The writing of the history of ideas is, in fact, marked in particular by
two examples of such parochialism. First, there is the danger that the
historian may misuse his vantage-point in describing the apparent reference
of some given statement in a classic text. An argument in one work, that
is, may happen to remind the historian of a similar argument in an earlier
work, or may appear to contradict it. In either case the historian may
mistakenly come to suppose that it was the intention of the later writer
to refer to the earlier, and so may come to speak misleadingly of the
‘influence’ of the earlier work. Now there is no doubt that the concept
of influence, while extremely elusive (if it is to be distinguished from a

=== p. 46 ===

cause) is far from being empty of explanatory force.1°¢ The danger is,
however, that it is so easy to use the concept in an apparently explanatory
way without any consideration of whether the conditions sufficient, or at
least necessary, for the proper application of the concept have been met.
The (very frequent) result — for example, in the history of political ideas
— is a story which reads like nothing so much as the first chapters of
Chronicles, though without the genetic justification. Consider, for example,
the alleged genealogy of Edmund Burke’s political views. His aim in his
Thoughts on the Causes of the Present Discontents, we are told, was ‘to
counteract the influence of Bolingbroke’.1°7 Bolingbroke himself is said to
have been under the influence of Locke.198 Locke in turn is either said —
despite appearances — to have been much influenced by Hobbes, to whom
he must ‘really’ have been intending to refer in the Second Treatise,!°°
or else is said to be concerned there to counter Hobbes’s influence.!!°
And Hobbes in turn is said to have been influenced by Machiavelli,!!!
by whom indeed everyone is said to have been influenced.!!2
   Most of these explanations are purely mythological, as can readily be
demonstrated simply by considering what the necessary conditions would
have to be for helping to explain the appearance in any given writer B
of any given doctrine, by invoking the ‘influence’ of some earlier given
writer, A. Such a set of conditions would at least have to include (a)
that there should be a genuine similarity between the doctrines of A
and B; (b) that B could not have found the relevant doctrine in any
writer other than A;!!3 (c) that the probability of the similarity being
random should be very low (ie., even if there is a similarity, and it
is shown that it could have been A that B was influenced by, it must
still be shown that B did not as a matter of fact articulate the relevant
doctrine independently). Now consider the example above in terms of
this not very stringent model. It is arguable that the alleged influence of
Machiavelli on Hobbes, and of Hobbes on Locke, even fails to pass test
(a). Certainly Hobbes never explicitly discusses Machiavelli, and Locke
never explicitly discusses Hobbes. It is demonstrable that the alleged
influence of Hobbes on Locke, and of Bolingbroke on Burke, both fail
to pass test (b). (Burke might equally well have found all the doctrines
of Bolingbroke by which he is said to have been influenced in a whole
range of early eighteenth-century pamphlets.)!!4 Locke might similarly
have found all the doctrines said to be characteristic of Hobbes in a
whole range of 1650s de facto political writings — which, indeed, Locke
is at least known   to have read, while it is not at all clear that he read
Hobbes’s works.!!5 And finally, it is clear that none of the examples cited
can be made to pass test (c). (It is indeed clear that the issues raised by
test (c) have not even been faced in any of these cases.) It is thus scarcely
an exaggeration'!® to say that this whole repertoire of Einfluss-studies in

=== p. 47 ===

the history of ideas is based on nothing better than the capacity of the
observer to foreshorten the past by filling it with his own reminiscences.

The other form of conceptual parochialism which particularly marks
the history of ideas is that the observer may unconsciously misuse his
vantage-point in describing the sense of a given work. There is always the
danger, that is, that the historian may conceptualize an argument in such
a way that its alien elements are dissolved into an apparent but misleading
familiarity. This danger arises pre-eminently in social anthropology, of
course; there it has become the object of considerable and self-conscious
attention by both theorists and practitioners. But it also arises scarcely
less seriously in the history of ideas, in which a similar self-conciousness
seems damagingly absent. The resulting misinterpretations are many: two
very obvious examples must here serve to illustrate the point. Consider,
for example, the case of an historian who decides (perhaps quite rightly)
that a fundamental feature of radical political thinking during the English
Revolution was a concern with the extension of the right to vote. He may
then be led to conceptualize this characteristically ‘Leveller’ demand in
terms of an argument for democracy. The danger arises, however, when the
concept of a ‘philosophy of liberal democracy’ !"7 is then used as a paradigm
for the description and understanding of the Leveller movement. First, the
paradigm makes it unnecessarily difficult to account for some of the most
characteristic features of Leveller ideology. For if we are programmed to
think in terms of the ‘republican secularism’ of the movement, it is not
surprising that their agonizings over the Monarchy and their appeals to
religious sentiment begin to look somewhat baffling.!!8 And second, the
paradigm of ‘democracy’ will tend to lead the historical investigation
in rather inappropriate directions. Some anachronistic concept of ‘the
welfare state’!19 has to be found in Leveller thought, as well as belief
in ‘manhood suffrage’, which they never in fact held.!2° Or consider,
similarly, the case of an historian who decides (again perhaps quite rightly)
that the arguments in Locke’s Second Treatise about the right to resist
tyrannical governments are related to his arguments about the place of
consent in any decent political community. He may then be led to use
the notion of ‘Government by consent’ as a paradigm for the description
of Locke’s argument.!2! The same danger then arises. When we speak of
government by consent we usually have in mind a theory concerned with
the best organization of government. It is thus natural, or rather fatally
easy, to turn with this conceptualization in mind to Locke’s text, and
duly to find some such theory rather bunglingly set out there. There is
decisive evidence,!22 however, that when Locke spoke of government by
consent this simply did not happen to be what he had in mind at all.
It is now clear that Locke’s concern with the concept of consent arises

=== p. 48 ===

solely in connection with the origin of legitimate societies. This is hardly
what we should regard as an argument for consent, but it happens to
be Locke’s argument, and the only result of failing to start from this
point is to misdescribe the whole theory, and so to accuse Locke of
having bungled an account which he was not, in fact, trying to write.
The point is that even when an historian of ideas addresses himself
solely to the description of a text, and even when his paradigms reflect
genuinely organizing features of the text, the same essential danger still
remains: the danger that the very familiarity of the concepts the historian
uses may mask some essential inapplicability to the historical material.
    The perennial difficulty with which I have been concerned throughout
is thus that while it is inescapable, it is also dangerous in_these various
ways to empirical       good sense for the historian_of ideas to approach
his material with preconceived paradigms. It will by now be evident,
moreover, that the point at which such dangers arise is the point at
which the historian in effect begins to ignore certain general criteria,
logical as well as empirical, which must necessarily apply to the whole
enterprise of making and understanding statements. A consideration of
the nature of these issues may thus serve to summarize as well as to corroborate the methodological lessons on which I have sought to insist.
    The relevant logical consideration is that no agent can eventually be
said to have meant or done something which he could never be brought to
accept  as a correct description of what he had meant or done. This special
authority of an agent over his intentions does not exclude, of course, the
possibility that an observer might be in a position to give a fuller or more
convincing account of the agent’s behaviour than he could give himself.
(Psychoanalysis is indeed founded on this possibility.) But it does exclude
the possibility that an acceptable account of an agent’s behaviour could ever
survive the demonstration that it was itself dependent on the use of criteria
of description and classification not available to the agent himself. For if
a given statement or other action has been performed by an agent at will,
and has a meaning for him, it follows that any plausible account of what
the agent meant must necessarily fall under, and make use of, the range of
descriptions which the agent himself could at least in principle have applied
to describe and classify what he was doing. Otherwise the resulting account,
however compelling, cannot be an account of his statement or action.     !23 It
will be evident by now that it is precisely this consideration which is so
readily ignored whenever a given classic writer is criticized by an historian
of ideas for failing to enunciate his doctrines in a coherent fashion, or for
failing to enunciate a doctrine on one of the allegedly perennial issues. For
it cannot (logically) be a correct appraisal of any agent’s action to say that
he failed to do something unless it is first clear that he did have, and
even could have had, the intention to try to perform that action. To

=== p. 49 ===

apply this test is simply to recognize that many of the questions with
which we have been concerned (questions such as whether Marsilius
of Padua enunciated a doctrine of the separation of powers, and so
on) are not merely scholastic, but strictly speaking void for lack of
reference, and so meaningless. For there is no means of reformulating
any such questions in terms that could in principle have made sense
to the agent himself. (A fourteenth-century anti-papalist pamphleteer can
scarcely have been intending to contribute to an eighteenth-century French
constitutionalist debate.) The same test equally makes it clear that all claims
about ‘anticipations’, all remarks such as the claim that ‘we may regard
Locke’s theory’ of signs ‘as an anticipation of Berkeley’s metaphysics’ are
meaningless.!24 For there is no point in so regarding Locke’s theory if the
                                                                             ye
aim is to say anything at all about what Locke himself was doing. (It can
                                                                                cha
                                                                                  Wit
scarcely have been Locke’s intention to anticipate Berkeley’s metaphysics.) as
And if such historical studies are not to be studies of what genuine
historical agents did think (or at least could have thought), then they
might as well be turned into fiction by intention, for they must certainly
be fiction by attainment. History (notwithstanding a fashionable attitude
among philosophers) cannot simply consist of stories: a further feature
of historical stories is that they are at least supposed to be true.!25
    The relevant empirical considerations amount to little more than
commonplace, but amazingly elusive, facts about the activity of thinking.
The first is that it is surely at least a ‘fact about many people’ (and
a fact with which the moralist needs to reckon)!26 that they may
consciously adopt incompatible ideals and beliefs in different moods and
at different times. And even if it is insisted that there may be thinkers
whose ideals and beliefs remain in a more or less steady state, there is
still a second consideration, that to think at all is surely to engage in
an ‘effortful activity’,!27 and not just to manipulate effortlessly some sort
of kaleidoscope of mental images. The attempt to think out problems, as a
matter of common introspection and observation, does not seem to take the
form of, or to be reducible to, a patterned or even a uniformly purposive
activity. It_is surely empirically commonplace that_we engage rather in
an often intolerable wrestle with words and_their_meanings, that we
characteristically spill over the limits of our intelligence and get confused,
and that our attempts to synthesize our views may in consequence reveal
conceptual disorder at least as much as coherent doctrines. It will be
evident by now that it is precisely this consideration which is ignored
whenever an interpreter insists on collecting the regrettably ‘scattered’    Yuko.
thought of some classic writer and presenting them systematically, or on
discovering some level of coherence at which the efforts and confusions
which   ordinarily   mark   the activity of thinking are made    to disappear.

=== p. 50 ===

                                     Ill

It may seem by now that the argument which I have so far presented
is open to a crucial objection. To illustrate the various dangers of writing
historical nonsense by concentrating on what each classic writer says about
each given doctrine is scarcely the same, it might be argued, as to prove the
conceptual impossibility of writing good history by adopting this approach.
It is surely true, in any case, that there are at least some writers (Hobbes
perhaps springs to mind) who may fairly be said to have articulated
a fully coherent set of doctrines, even a ‘system of ideas’.!?8 If the
tendency, moreover, for the study simply of a writer’s doctrines to generate
mythologies is only to be classified as a danger, it is surely one which, with
sufficient self-consciousness, the historian may well hope to avoid. And if
such dangers can be avoided, the demand for a wholly different approach
to studying the history of ideas must begin after all to seem somewhat
alarmist and unjustified. The answer to such objections is of course that
it is not the existence of doctrines in the history of thought which is in
question. What is in question — even in the case where a given writer may
appear to have articulated a system of doctrines with complete coherence
— is the possibility, the conceptual propriety, of treating such a system as a
self-sufficient object of inquiry and understanding. In considering this issue,
moreover, I now wish to advance a thesis complementary to, but much
stronger than, the one I have just argued. I have argued that the danger of
writing historical nonsense, in direct consequence of concentrating on the
text in itself, is often incurred, and indeed very seldom avoided altogether
in current practice. | now wish to claim that even if all the dangers I have
outlined could be avoided (as they doubtless could, though they seldom
are) the underlying assumption of this whole approach — that one should
focus simply on the texts themselves, and study what each classic writer
has to say about each given doctrine — must necessarily remain a wholly
inadequate methodology for the conduct of the history of ideas. I shall
seek to argue this claim, moreover, with reference both to intellectual
biography, where the doctrines of a given writer are in question, and to
‘histories of ideas’, where the morphology of the doctrine itself is traced
out. It can be shown in both cases that while the study of the texts and
their doctrines in themselves may often appear to yield quite satisfactory
results, the methodology remains incapable in principle of considering or
even recognizing some of the most crucial problems which must arise in
any attempt to understand the relations between what a given writer may
have said, and what he may be said to have meant by saying what he said.
   Intellectual biography (as well as the more synoptic histories of thought
built on the same model) is subject first of all to the obvious difficulty that
the literal meanings of key terms sometimes change over time, so that a given

=== p. 51 ===

                         Meaning and understanding                          S1
writer may say something with a quite different sense and reference from the
one which may occur to the reader. Consider, for example, the reception
of Berkeley’s immaterialism at the hands of his contemporary critics. Both
Baxter and Reid remarked on the ‘egoism’ of Berkeley’s outlook, and it
was under this heading that Berkeley appeared in the Encyclopédie.'”° It is
thus of some consequence to know that if Berkeley’s contemporaries had
intended to accuse him of what we should mean by egoism, they would
have been much more likely to refer to something like his ‘Hobbism’. When
they spoke of his ‘egoism’, what they meant was something much more like
what we should mean by solipsism.!39 Such reminders perhaps provide the
most convenient means of countering the Fregean assumption that meanings
must somehow be timeless. A more interesting and intractable objection
however to the attempt to make the text in itself a self-sufficient object of
understanding is suggested by the various oblique strategies which a writer
may always decide to adopt in order to set out and at the same time to
disguise what he means by what he says about some given doctrine. Such
obliqueness may also be the result, of course, of ignorance or inadvertence.
(It is possible, for example, consistently to say something other than what
I mean to convey, perhaps due to a misunderstanding of the meanings of
the words I use.) Some such examples can be important (for instance in
translating), but I shall concentrate here on the central and simpler case
of using oblique reference as a deliberate strategy. To take a necessarily
simplified example (for the issue itself is plainly very complex), consider the
case of the doctrine of religious toleration, as it presented itself to English
intellectuals at the time of the English Toleration Act. There is no doubt that
the various contributions to the discussion all reflect a common intention
and thus a common theme. It could only be as the result, however, of a most
sophisticated historical investigation (the character of which remains to be
delineated) that we could come to recognize, say, that Defoe’s proposed
Experiment for dealing with dissenters, Hoadly’s Letter to the Pope about
the powers of the Church, and Locke’s Letter concerning Toleration all
reflect a common intention to say something very similar about the doctrine
involved. A study simply of what each writer said about the doctrine would
more or less guarantee blank misunderstanding of Defoe, and at least
considerable confusion about Hoadly. Only Locke seems to say anything
resembling what he seems to mean, and even here we might wish (perhaps
remembering Swift) to find some means of assuring ourselves that no irony
was intended. The problem is not to be resolved, moreover (pace Professor
Strauss) simply by saying that this must be a case in which the writers were
unable to say what they meant (so that their meaning must be decoded by
reading between the lines). The problem is rather that we need to understand
what strategies have been voluntarily adopted to convey their meaning with
deliberate obliqueness. And the point is that it is hard to see how any

=== p. 52 ===

     amount of reading the text ‘over and over again’, as we are exhorted
     to do,!3! could possibly serve as the means to gain this understanding.
        The most intractable form of this problem about oblique strategies — and
     the form most inimical to the view that a given writer’s text can serve as an
eS   autonomous object of understanding — arises when there is some question
     as to whether it is ‘historically more credible’ to say of a writer that he
     ‘believed what he wrote’ than to suggest that what he said was insincerely
     meant, that he ‘wrote with his tongue in his cheek’, 22 It has indeed been
     recently suggested in an important discussion that ‘our conviction as to an
     author’s sincerity’ is perhaps the issue with most ‘particular relevance’ to any
     discussion about the place of intentionality in the understanding of works of
     literature. No examples, however, of the issues thus raised were given in this
     discussion.  !33 It seems appropriate, therefore, to give some more consideration to this issue as it arises in practice, especially as the question has recently
     been posed by historians of ideas in a notable way in the exegetical literature
     on two important figures, Hobbes and Bayle. In the case of Hobbes, the
     doctrine he enunciated about the laws of nature included both the claim that
     the laws of nature are the laws of God, and that men are obliged to obey
     the laws of nature. It has been traditional to dismiss these overt sentiments
     as the work of an arch-sceptic slyly pressing a familiar vocabulary into the
     most heterodox use. The trend in much recent exegesis, however, has been
     to insist (the form of words is very revealing) that Hobbes must after all
     have ‘meant quite seriously what he so often says, that the “Natural Law”
     is the command of God, and to be obeyed because it is God’s command’.             134
     Hobbes’ scepticism is thus treated as a disguise: when it is shrugged off, he
     emerges as the exponent of a thoroughly Kantian doctrine. Similarly with
     Bayle, whose Dictionary contains most of the doctrines appropriate to a
     Calvinist theology of the most rigorous and unforgiving kind. It has again
     been traditional to dismiss this overt message by appealing to the presence
     of a desperate, systematic irony. Again, however, the trend of the best
     recent literatures has been to insist that, so far from being the prototype
     of the sneering philosophes, Bayle must be seen as a genuinely religious
     thinker,!35 a man of faith!3¢ with ‘solid roots in the religious tradition’.137
        I am not concerned here to ask directly which of these interpretations may
     be said to offer the best account of Hobbes’ or Bayle’s texts. 1am concerned
     only to point out the inadequacy of the methodology by which these new
     interpretations have been guided and established. It has been insisted that ‘a
     close study of the texts’,!38 a concentration on the texts ‘for themselves’   !39
     will be sufficient to make the case for the new interpretations. It does
     not seem to have been recognized, however, that the acceptance of these
     interpretations as textually correct entails the acceptance of some much less
     obviously correct assumptions about Hobbes, Bayle, and the age in which
     they both lived. First, both Hobbes and Bayle were accepted not only by the

=== p. 53 ===

philosophes as their great predecessors in iconoclasm (a verdict also recorded on Hobbes by Bayle himself) but were also understood in the same way by
all their contemporary opponents and sympathizers. It was never doubted
that each had intended to deal both ironically and destructively with the
prevailing theological orthodoxies. (Nor is there any difficulty in principle
about accepting that both had the capacity to deal in sustained irony in the
necessary way. Even if Hobbes’ tone in the fourth Book of Leviathan is not
certain, there can be little doubt about the ironic form of a work like Bayle’s
Various Thoughts on the Comet.)!4° It is possible, of course, though very
difficult, to dismiss this point by insisting on the (very remarkable) coincidence that all of Hobbes’s and all of Bayle’s contemporary opponents were
all equally, and in exactly the same way, mistaken as to their real intentions.
The point is, however, that to accept this unlikely assumption is merely to
raise a second peculiar difficulty, about Hobbes and Bayle themselves.       !4!
Both had particular cause to recognize that religious heterodoxy was a ver

Aubrey) lest the Bishops bring in ‘a motion to have the good old gentleman
burn’t for a heretique’.!42 Bayle even suffered the ironic fate of having his
professorship at Sedan removed for being anti-Catholic, and later of having
his professorship at Rotterdam removed for not being anti-Catholic enough.
If it is still true, then, that both these writers intended their works to
propagate orthodox religious sentiment, it becomes impossible to understand why neither of them removed from later editions of their works — as
both could have done, and Bayle was even asked to do — those portions which
were apparently so completely misunderstood, and why neither of them
spent any time in attempting to correct the apparent misconceptions which
immediately arose and were publicized!#3 about the intentions of their
works. The importance of these implications is of course that they suggest
how far the texts of both Hobbes and Bayle raise issues which a study simply
of the texts themselves then becomes quite inadequate to resolve. If we are
now led by these implications to doubt that the texts do convey in what they
say what they were intended to mean, this is to adopt an interpretation on
the strength of evidence quite outside the texts themselves. But if we now
wish to go on insisting that the texts do mean what they say, we are now
left with the problem of trying to account for the peculiar implications of
this view. The point is that whichever view we now take, the text in itself
is shown to be insufficient as the object of our inquiry and understanding.

Any attempt, in intellectual biography, to concentrate on the texts themselves thus completely fails to deal with the problems raised by what I have
called oblique strategies. I turn now to the analogous type of inadequacy
which marks the method of concentrating instead on the ‘idea’ itself as a
‘unit’,!44 and so of ‘tracking a grand but elusive theme’ either throughout a
period or even ‘over many centuries’.!45 The danger that such an approach

=== p. 54 ===

may simply engender empirically false claims has already been skilfully
pointed out for at least one classic case of this tendency to find what has been
called ‘spurious persistence’. !46The mistake which is involved, for example,
in trying to insist that the thirteenth century and the Enlightenment were
both pre-eminently ‘ages of faith’ (and thus have much more in common
than the philosophes themselves would have cared to admit)!47 is clearly
the mistake of taking the word for the thing. For to speak of an age of
faith, it has been neatly observed, may equally well be to speak of an age
of submission (faith rather than argument) or an age of confidence (faith in
oneself).!48 The notion that any fixed ‘idea’ has persisted is spurious. My
concern here, however, is not empirical but conceptual: not to insist that
such histories can sometimes go wrong, but that they can never go right.
My point is that even if we restrict the study of an ‘idea’ to a given historical
period — so that the problem raised by this type of changed connotation is
ruled out — there is still an underlying conceptual confusion in any attempt
to focus on an idea itself as an appropriate unit of historical investigation.
   Consider for example the attempt to write the history of the idea of
nobilitas in the Renaissance — a quite plausible enterprise, very similar to
many that have been carried out. The historian might begin, quite properly,
by pointing out that the meaning of the term is given by the fact that it was
used to refer to a particularly prized moral quality. Or he might, equally
properly, point out that the same term was also used to denote membership
of a particular social class. It might not in practice be clear which meaning
we are to understand in a given case. When Bacon remarked, for example,
that nobility adds majesty to a monarch, but diminishes power, we might,
remembering his admiration for Machiavelli, think of the first meaning as
readily as we might, remembering his official position, think of the second.
A further problem, moreover, is raised by the fact that this ambiguity sometimes seems to have been used by Renaissance moralists in a studied way.
Sometimes the aim is to insist that one might have noble qualities even if one
lacked noble birth. This possibility that men might rightly be called noble
‘more for remembrance of their virtue than for discrepance of estates’ is a
frequent paradox in Renaissance moral thought.!4? But sometimes the aim
is rather to insist that while nobility is a matter of attainment, it happens to
be invariably connected with nobility of birth. This possibility, indeed, was
understandably even more commonly pointed out.!5° It was always open
to the moralist, moreover, to turn the basic ambiguity against the concept
of nobilitas itself, in order to contrast nobility of birth with accompanying
baseness of behaviour. It can be argued, for example, that when More in
Utopia speaks of the behaviour of the military aristocracy as being fittingly
noble, he intends to bring the whole concept of nobility into disrepute.15!
   The example is obviously excessively simplified, but it is still sufficient,
I believe, to bring out both the two essential criticisms of the project of

=== p. 55 ===

                         Meaning and understanding                            ay)
studying histories of ‘ideas’ on which I wish to insist. First, it becomes clear
that if we wish to understand a given idea, even within a given culture and
at a given time, we cannot simply concentrate, a la Lovejoy, on studying the
forms of words involved. For the words denoting the idea may be used, as
the example indicates, with varying and quite incompatible intentions. We
cannot even hope that a sense of the context of utterance will necessarily
resolve this problem. For the context, as Bacon’s remark indicates, may itself
be ambiguous. Rather we must study all the various situations, which may
change in complex ways, in which the given form of words can logically be
used — all the functions the words can serve, all the various things that can
be done with them. The great mistake lies not merely in looking for the
‘essential meaning’ of the ‘idea’ as something which must necessarily ‘remain
the same’, but even in thinking of any ‘essential’ meaning (to which individual writers ‘contribute’) at all.152 The appropriate, and famous, formula —
famous to philosophers, at least — is rather that we should study not the
meanings of the words, but their use. For the given idea cannot ultimately
be said in this sense!53 to have any meaning that can take the form of a set
of words which can then be excogitated and traced out over time. Rather
the meaning of the idea must be its uses to refer in various ways. !54
   My second and explicitly critical claim clearly follows from this. If
there is good reason to insist that we can only study an idea by seeing

within which it might appear, then there             must_be correspondingly good
reason to insist that the project of studying histories of ‘ideas’, tout court,
must rest on a fundamental philosophical mistake. That this is indeed the
case, and that itgives rise in practice to unavoidable confusions, can now
be readily illustrated. The underlying confusion itself may perhaps be most
conveniently characterized, by adopting an extension of the basic distinction
between meaning and use, as the result of a failure to distinguish between
the occurrence of the words (phrases or sentences) which denote the given
idea, and the use of the relevant sentence by a particular agent on a
particular occasion with a particular intention (his intention) to make a
particular statement.155 To write the history of an idea, it may be said,
is obviously to write, in effect, the history of a sentence. It is undoubtedly
characteristic of such histories that statement-making agents appear more
or less only because the relevant ideas — the social contract, the idea of
Utopia, the great chain of being, and so on — can be shown to occur in their
works, so that they can be said to have contributed to their development.
What we cannot learn from any such history is in the first place what part,
trivial or important, the given idea may have played in the thought of any
individual thinker who happened to mention it, or what place, characteristic
or unusual, it may have taken in the intellectual climate of any given period
in which it appeared. We may perhaps learn that the expression was used

=== p. 56 ===

at different times to answer a variety of problems. But what we still cannot
learn — to cite Collingwood’s very important point!5® — is what questions
the use of the expression was thought to answer, and so what reasons
there were for continuing to employ it. It follows from this that we could
never grasp from such a history what status the given idea may have had
at various times, so that we cannot eventually be said to have gained any
proper historical understanding of its importance and value. And in the
second place, we cannot learn from such histories either what pot a
given expression might have had for the agents who used it, or what range
of uses the expression itself could sustain. And it follows from this that
we can never really grasp from such a history what meanings the given
expression may have had, so that we cannot eventually be said to gain from
such studies any understanding even of the occurrence of the idea itself.
   The nature of the criticism to be made of such histories is not merely
that they seem perpetually liable in this way to lose any point. It is rather
that as soon as we see there is no determinate idea to which various writers
contributed, but only a variety of statements made with the words by a
variety of different agents with a variety of intentions, then what we are
seeing is equally that there is no history of the idea to be written, but only a
history necessarily focused on the various agents who used the idea, and on
their varying situations and intentions in using it. Such a history, moreover,
can hardly be expected even to retain the form of the history of an idea. If
an historian, for example, who studies the idea of Utopia comes to see that
the uses to which the idea has been put are bewilderingly various, then it
would seem little more than a very misleading fetishism of words to go on
trying to make any sort of historical study out of focusing on the ‘idea’ of
Utopia itself — or progress, equality, sovereignty, justice, natural law, and so
on and on. For the persistence of such expressions tells us nothing reliable
at all about the persistence of the questions which the expressions may have
been used to answer, or of the intentions generally of the various writers
who may have used the expressions. The only history to be written is thus -
a history of the various statements made with the given expression. This —
rather than the history of the sentence itself —would of course be an almost
absurdly ambitious enterprise. But it would at least be conceptually proper,
whereas the sentence itself, apart from the statements which various agents
may choose to make with it, is simply not a proper object of study — not even
by the logician, it has been argued,!57 and certainly not by the historian.

                                     IV

The second of the two methodologies which I mentioned at the outset
may well appear at this point to reveal decisive advantages as a way

=== p. 57 ===

of studying the history of ideas. If it is conceptually improper, in the
ways I have suggested, to concentrate simply on a given idea or a

methodologists themselves increasingly insist — in recognizing instead that
our ideas constitute ‘a response to more immediate circumstances’,!58 and
that we should in consequence study not the texts in themselves, but rather
‘the context ofother happenings which explains them’? Iristrue that this
alternative methodology has been very consciously resisted, in particular by
historians of philosophy and by political scientists, both anxious to insist on
the autonomy of textual study. For if the point of studying the classics of
these disciplines is conceived in terms of their ‘timeless wisdom’, then it is
absolutely essential, as I have already hinted, to be able to insist that even
though they may be ‘grounded in the social reality’ of their age, they ‘are also
ageless’,!©° ‘surpassing’ the need to consider any such contingent ‘reality’.!6!
The whole point is endangered unless the ‘historical, biographical, and
logical baggage which surrounds the “Great Books”’ can if necessary be
‘ruthlessly thrown overboard’.'!6? Nevertheless, the advantage of insistin
instead that the baggage of ‘social context’ will oa              ae

self in a position to avoid or even to solve many of the exegetical problems |
have sought to raise. A knowledge of the social context of a given text seems
at least to offer considerable help in avoiding the anachronistic mythologies
I have tried to anatomize. And | have already to some extent invoked the
need for such knowledge in considering the conceptual inadequacy of purely
textual studies. Thus if it is true that an understanding of any idea requires
an understanding of all the occasions and activities in which a given agent

part of such understanding must lie in grasping what sort of society the
given author was writing for and trying to persuade. And if it is true that
the understanding of a text presupposes the capacity to grasp any oblique
strategies it may contain, it is again clear that the relevant information (as I
have already sought to prove in the case of Hobbes and Bayle) must at least
in part be concerned with the constraints of the given social situation.
   The belief that this method of ‘contextual reading’!*3 does provide
the appropriate methodology for the history of ideas, literary as well as
philosophical, appears in practice to be becoming increasingly accepted.!*4
It is usual now for even the most synoptic histories of classic texts to
include both some concession about knowing ‘something of social and
political conditions’,!6° and some gesture toward paying “due regard’ to
‘the historical conditions’ which ‘produced’ the texts themselves.!6¢ And
the systematic adoption of this approach has of course produced its
own distinctive and increasingly distinguished literature. In the histories
of economic and even scientific thought, the method has been classically

=== p. 58 ===

       applied in the form of the claim that the social context of Puritan attitudes
       explains the rise both of the spirit of capitalist enterprise!67 and of scientific
       enquiry!68 in the seventeenth century. Similarly, in the histories of social,
       ethical, and political ideas, much has been written about the theory that
       modern developments in these spheres of thought mirrored and followed the
       changes and developments of the social context. Such histories usually begin
       with the social structure of the Renaissance,!®? and reach their climax with
        that of seventeenth-century England. The hero of the story is thus Thomas
        Hobbes, the first as well as the greatest of the distinctively bourgeois
        philosophers.!79 And the truth of the story is at this point best corroborated,
        it is said, by considering the position of James Harrington, the first theorist
        of the ‘opportunity state’.!7! (We are still faced, of course, with the purely
        historical embarrassment that the commentators have been unable to agree
        on whether the class of which Harrington was the ideologist was rising or
        falling in power. But it is essential to recognize that even Professors Tawney
        and Trevor-Roper agreed on one essential point about the gentry: that
        Harrington was ‘their champion’,!72 and that the key to understanding what
        Harrington must have been saying is thus to be found in the study of the
        social structure which he analysed.) When this point in the story is reached,
        moreover, the rest of its development, up to the time when capitalism is
        said to have caused the characteristic alienation of the intellectuals, typically
        consists of a story essentially about whether and how far each classic writer
        accepted and so reflected the new social structure. The explanation of
        Locke’s thought is thus that he accepted the new structure with enthusiasm:
        this explains what he has to say about property.!73 The explanation of
        Bolingbroke’s thought is that he was more enthusiastic about the social
        structure which was passing away: this explains his ‘politics of nostalgia’.174
        The explanation of Adam Smith’s thought is that he accepted the new structure, but for reasons unconcerned with its own ends: this explains the apparent contradictions as well as the real (moral) message of his thought.!75
            If it is true that the relations between the context of any given statement
        (or any other action)!7¢ and the statement itself do take the form, in
Non     this way, of a relation between antecedent causal conditions and their
        results, then it is clear that the independent life of ideas in history must
        be correspondingly in danger.'77 One paradoxical result of the widespread
      ( acceptance of this methodology of contextual study has in consequence
        been to panic the historians of ideas into the suspicion that their subject
        may not really ‘exist’ after all.!78 And the main result has been to commit
        even the best current practitioners to a formula which quite simply begs all
        the questions: the social context, it is said, helps to cause the formation
        and change of ideas; but the ideas in turn help to cause the formation
        and change of the social context.!7? Thus the historian of ideas ends up by
        presenting himself with nothing better than the time-honoured puzzle about

=== p. 59 ===

the chicken and the egg, while the more hard-headed historian of ‘reality’
congratulates himself on having devalued such an unprofitable exercise.!8°
   It is my essential contention, however, that none of this panic or
equivocation is at all well-judged, since the methodology of contextual
reading, in both its Marxist and Namierite versions (they are oddly
similar) can itself be shown to rest on a fundamental mistake about
the nature of the relations between action and circumstance.!8! Despite
the possibility, therefore, that a study of social context may help in
the understanding   of a text, which   I have conceded,    the fundamental
assumption of the contextual methodology, that the ideas of a given text       eS,
should be understood in terms of its social context, can be shown to be
mistaken, and to serve in consequence not as the guide to understanding, but
as the source of further very prevalent confusions in the history of ideas.
   The fact that a knowledge of the context of a given text does help
in understanding it reflects the fact, surely undeniable, that for the
performance of any action — and the making of statements is surely to
be appraised as a performance's2 — it will always be possible, at least in
principle, to discover a set of conditions either such that the action (the
statement made) might have been different or might not have occurred
in their absence, or even such that the occurrence of the action might
have been predicted from their presence. There seems no question that for
every statement there must be some explanatory context, for every action
some set of antecedent causal conditions.'83 To concentrate instead on the
alleged affective states of the agent as the means to provide an alternative
(teleological) mode of explanation of a given statement or other action
seems at the very least to ignore!84 a good deal of information which
is bound to be relevant to any attempted explanation. Conversely, the
hypothesis that the context of a text can be used to explain its content
may be said to illustrate, but also to gain strength from, the more general
and increasingly accepted hypothesis that actions performed at will are to
be accounted for by the ordinary processes of causal explanation.   !85
   It may well be strenuously doubted, however, whether a knowledge
of the causes of an action is really equivalent to an understanding of the
action itself. For as well as — and quite apart from — the fact that such an
understanding does presuppose a grasp of antecedent causal conditions of
the action taking place, it might equally be said to presuppose a grasp of
the point of the action for the agent who performed it. It is a striking
fact about current discussions of the claim that actions are caused that
they tend to be mounted in terms of such excessively simple and routine
examples — always things like putting on one’s coat,!8¢ never things like
writing the Iliad'87 — that the question of the point of the action is very
easily made to seem wholly transparent, or quite unimportant. And it is
a further striking fact that the examples which have made it seem most

=== p. 60 ===

plausible to suppose that puzzles about actions may be resolved simply
by stating the conditions of their occurrence have often been those in
which a lawyer could speak of diminished responsibility and in which
we might more colloquially speak of behaving pointlessly — cases of
being drunk or drugged, of losing one’s temper, and so on.!88
   It is true of course that a somewhat scholastic device can be applied
at this point to rescue the claim that even fully intended and complex
actions are best understood as the results of causes. For a motive or an
intention, it is said, is itself a cause, in the sense that it is antecedent to
and contingently connected with the resulting action.!8? I may intend to
do something, but never do it. This is said to discredit any Wittgensteinian
notion to the effect that there can be any closer ‘logical’ connection
(perhaps of a syllogistic character)!9° between intentions and actions. This
riposte has been regarded as deadly,'9! but it appears to rest on two crucial
misconceptions about the procedures by which we may be said to come
to an understanding at least of that subset of actions — the making of
statements — with which I am here concerned. It is thus my central claim
that a consideration of these two misconceptions in turn will serve to
discredit the notion that a study of the contextual conditions of making
statements can in any sense be regarded as a sufficient or even appropriate
methodology for the understanding of statements made.
    First, the notion that intentions are contingently connected with actions
seems to rest on a pun or confusion between two different senses in which
the concept of intention can validly be applied. Suppose that Defoe, in
writing about toleration, had stated, as he might have done, his intention
to compose a whole series of pamphlets on the subject. As he never did so,
what we have here is a stated intention unaccompanied by any resulting
action: the best proof that the relation between the two concepts must be
of a contingent, and so can be of a causal, character. Suppose, however
that Defoe had stated, as again he might have done, that his intention in
the pamphlet which he did write on toleration was to promote this cause
 by parodying the arguments against it. What we have here is an intention
 not antecedent to and contingently related with his actual statements at
all: rather the statement of intention serves to characterize the action itself.
And it is purely scholastic to reply that even this intention must precede
the action, and thus might still be treated as an antecedent condition.
For statements of intention of this kind can quite validly be made to
characterize an action after it has been performed. The distinction, in
short, is between an intention to do x which may never successfully issue
in an action — though it is not made clear what we should say if such prior
statements of intention never issued in actions — and an intention in doing
x, which not merely presupposes the occurrence of the relevant action, but
is logically connected with it in the sense that it serves to characterize its

=== p. 61 ===

point. The significance of this claim for my present argument will by now
be clear. Every statement made or other action performed must presuppose
an intention to have done it — call it a cause if you like — but also an
intention in doing it, which cannot be a cause, but which must be grasped
if the action itself is to be correctly characterized and so understood.

to cope with the strongest form of the contextual thesis.!92 It is in effect an
argument about what a given agent may have meant by making a given
statement. But the claim made on behalf of the study of contexts was
precisely that they can in themselves serve to yield what the text must
mean. This only points, however, to the second mistaken assumption on
which this methodology appears to rest, the assumption that ‘meaning’
and ‘understanding’ are in fact strictly correlative terms. It has been
classically demonstrated, however, by J. L. Austin, that the understanding
of statements presupposes a grasp not merely of the meaning of the given
utterance, but also of what Austin labelled its intended illocutionary force. !93
This claim is crucially relevant to my present argument in two respects. First,
this further question about what a given agent may be doing in uttering his
utterance is not a question about meaning at all, but about a force coordinate with the meaning of the utterance itself, amd yet essential to grasp in
order to understand it.!94 And second, even if we could decode what a given
statement must mean from a study of its social context, it follows that this
would still leave us without any grasp of its intended illocutionary force, and
so eventually    without any real understanding of the given statement after

study of the social context of texts could serve to explain them, this would
not amount to the same as providing the means to understand them.
   This central claim — that the grasp of force as well as meaning is
essential to the understanding of texts, and yet cannot be supplied from the
study of their social context — can readily be illustrated in practice. Suppose
an historian comes across the following statement in a Renaissance moral
tract: ‘a prince must learn how not to be virtuous’. Suppose that the sense
and the intended reference of the statement are both perfectly clear. Suppose
even that this clarity is the result of a study of the entire social context of the
utterance — a study which might have revealed, say, that virtue in princes
had in fact led to their ruin at the time. Now suppose two alternative truths
about the statement itself: either that such cynical advice was frequently
offered in Renaissance moral tracts; or that scarcely anyone had ever
publicly offered such cynical advice as a precept before. It is obvious that any
commentator wishing to understand the statement must find out which of
these alternatives is nearer the truth. If the answer is the first alternative, the
intended force of the utterance itself in the mind of the agent who uttered it
can only have been to endorse or emphasize an accepted        moral attitude. But

=== p. 62 ===

     if the answer is the second, the intended force of the utterance becomes more
ee   like that of rejecting or repudiating an established _moral commonplace.
     Now it happens in fact that something like each of these historical claims
     has been advanced in turn by historians of ideas about the statement to this
     effect to be found in Machiavelli’s Prince.!95 Now it is obvious not merely
     that only one of these claims can be correct, but also that the decision on
     which one is correct will very greatly affect any understanding of what
     Machiavelli can have been intending to achieve. Potentially the question is
     whether he intended to subvert or to sustain one of the more fundamental
     moral commonplaces of political life in his time. But while such a decision
     may be said to be crucial in this way to understanding Machiavelli, it is
     neither the sort of decision which could ever be arrived at from studying
     the statement itself and its meaning (which is pellucid enough), nor from
     any amount of study of its social context, for the context itself is evidently
     capable of yielding both of the alternative illocutionary acts, and so can
     hardly be invoked to reject either in favour of the other. It must follow
     that in order to be said to have understood any statement made in the
     past, it cannot be enough to grasp what was said, or even to grasp that the
     meaning of what was said may have changed. It cannot in consequence be
     enough to study either what the statement meant, or even what its context
     may be alleged to show about what it must have meant. The further point
     which must still be grasped for any given statement is how what was
     said was meant, and thus what relations there may have been between
     various different statements even within the same general context.
        I have illustrated this claim about the insufficiency and even the
     potentially wholly misleading character of contextual as well as purely
     textual study only from the simplest possible type of case. But it is also
     arguable (as I have elsewhere sought to demonstrate)
                                                        !9° that Austin’s own
     discussion of illocutionary force needs to be extended, in certain more
     oblique ways, to deal with the identification of less overt and perhaps
     even non-avowable illocutionary acts. We need, for example, to be able to
     deal with the obvious but very elusive fact that a failure to use a particular
     argument may always be a polemical matter, and thus a required guide to
     the understanding of the relevant utterance. Consider, for example, the

     Since the discussion of political principles in seventeenth-century England
     virtually hinged on the study of rival versions of the English past,!97 a strong
     case could perhaps be made for saying that Locke’s failure to mention
     these issues constituted perhaps the most radical and original feature of
     his whole argument. As a clue to the understanding of Locke’s text, this
     is obviously important: but it is a clue which the study of the social
     context (still less the text itself) could never be made to yield. Similarly,
     we need to be able to cope with the intractable possibility that certain of

=== p. 63 ===

the classic philosophical texts may contain quite a large number of what
contemporaries would instantly have seen to be jokes. Plato and Hobbes
perhaps spring to mind: again, this would obviously be an important clue to
the understanding of their texts, but, again, it is hard to see how either of the
approved methodologies can help. And similarly, questions of allusion and
oblique reference generally clearly raise important problems of recognition
and correspondingly obvious dangers of misunderstanding any text in which
they figure prominently. These and other such problems are obviously too
intrinsically complex to illustrate briefly here, but they may already serve
to underline the central point, which the simpler examples have, I think,
sufficiently made clear: that to concentrate either on studying a text in itself,
or on studying its social context as a means of determining the meaning of
the text, is to make it impossible to recognize — let alone to solve — some
of the most difficult issues about the conditions for understanding texts.

                                       V

If my argument so far has been correct, two positive and general conclusions
can now be shown to follow from it. The first concerns the appropriate
method by which to study the history of ideas. On the one hand, it must be
a mistake even to try either to write intellectual biographies concentrating
on the works of a given writer, or to_write histories of ideas tracing        the
morphology of a given concept over time. Both these types of study (not to
mention the pedagogic histories of thought which combine their demerits)
are necessarily misconceived. On the other hand, it does not follow, as is
sometimes claimed,  198 that no particular way of studying the history of ideas
is any more satisfactory than any other. My first positive conclusion is rather
that the whole trend of my argument points to an alternative methodology
which need not be open to any of the criticisms I have so far advanced. The
understanding of texts, I have sought to insist, presupposes the grasp both
of what they   were intended to mean, and       how this meaning was intended
to be taken. It follows from this that to understand a text must be to
understand both the intention to be understood, and the intention that this
intention should be understood, which the text itself as an intended act of
communication must at least have embodied. The essential question which
we therefore confront, in studying any given text, is what its author, in writing at the time he did write for the audience he intended to address, could in
practice have been intending to communicate by the utterance of this given
utterance. It follows that the essential aim, in any attempt to understand the
utterances themselves, must be to recover this complex intention on the part
of the author. And it follows from this that the appropriate methodology for
the history of ideas must be concerned, first of all, to delineate the whole

=== p. 64 ===

range of communications which could have been conventionally performed
on the given occasion                    ce of the given utterance, and, next,
to trace the relations between the given utterance and this wider linguistic
context as a means of decoding the actual intention of the given writer.
Once the appropriate focus of the study is seen in this way to be essentially
linguistic and the appropriate methodology is seen in consequence to be
concerned in this way with the recovery of intentions, the study of all the
facts about the social context of the given text can then take its place _as
a part of this linguistic enterprise. The problem about the way in which
these facts are handled in the methodology of contextual study is that they
get fitted into an inappropriate framework. The ‘context’ mistakenly gets
treated as the determinant of what is said. It needs rather to be treated as an
ultimate framework for helping to decide what conventionally recognizable
meanings, in a society of that kind, it might in principle have been possible
for someone to have intended to communicate. (In this way, as I have sought
to prove in the case of Hobbes and Bayle, the context itself can be used as a
sort of court of appeal for assessing the relative plausibility of incompatible
ascriptions of intentionality.) I do not suggest, of course, that this conclusion
is in itself particularly novel.!99 What I do claim is that the critical survey I
have conducted may be said to establish and prove the case for this methodology — to establish it not as a suggestion, an aesthetic preference, or a piece
of academic imperialism, but as a matter of conceptual propriety, a matter of
seeing what the necessary conditions are for the understanding of utterances.
   My second general conclusion concerns the value of studying the
history of ideas. The most exciting possibility here, which I cannot now
explore, but which I have touched on in discussing both the causes of
action and the conditions for understanding statements, is the possibility
of a dialogue between philosophical discussion and historical evidence. It is
clear that the distinctions which have been established in the debates over
the causes and meanings of actions are not merely of use to historians, but
essential for historians to grasp, although — with damaging consequences
— they have not so far shown much consciousness of this fact. The
point here, however, is that the converse         of this may also be true.
The understanding of statements uttered in the past clearly raises special
issues, and might yield special insights, especially about the conditions
under which languages change. The philosophers have perhaps been rather
slow to take advantage of the possibly very large significance of this fact,
both for the analysis of meaning and understanding,2° as well as for the
discussion of the relations between belief and action, and in general
over the whole question of the sociology of knowledge.
   My main conclusion however, is that the critique I have mounted
already serves to suggest     a much   more   obvious   and less remote    point
about the philosophical value of studying the history of ideas. On the one

=== p. 65 ===

hand, it has I think become clear that any attempt to justify the study of
the subject in terms of the ‘perennial problems’ and ‘universal truths’ to be
learned from the classic texts must amount to the purchase of justification
at the expense of making the subject itself foolishly and needlessly naive.
Any statement, as I have sought to show, is inescapably the embodiment of
a particular intention, on a particular occasion, addressed to the solution an} Cau
of a   particular   problem, and thus specific to its situation in a way that it setak to
can only be naive to try to transcend. The vital implication here is not aralh
merely that the classic texts cannot be concerned with our questions and
answers, but only with their own. There is also the further implication that
— to revive Collingwood’s way of putting it — there simply are no perennial \\v- nd |
problems in philosophy: there are only individual answers to individual 4 &%* w

Sailers ba vedas alias RoEG coclarhes vonko ad                              the
by focusing on their attempted answers to supposedly timeless questions.
   This overwhelming element of contingency in the alleged answers
provided by the classic texts has frequently been emphasized, but I
believe it can be shown, in the light of the critique I have tried to mount,
that the precise nature of the point to be made about this issue has been
misunderstood by Collingwood as well as by his critics. Collingwood’s own
misunderstanding derived, | think, from the fact that he chose to link his
attack on ‘perennial questions’ with an excessively strong thesis to the effect
that we cannot even ask if a given philosopher ‘solved the problem he set
himself’, since we can only see what the problem was for him if he did solve
it. Thus ‘the fact that we can identify his problem is proof that he has solved
it; for we can only know what the problem was by arguing back from the
solution’.29! But this merely seems to be a version of the confusion I have
already sought to point out between an intention to do something and an
intention in doing something. It is true that unless I do perform the action
or solve the problem which | intended to do, then it can never be known
what my problem was — for there will simply be no evidence. It does not
follow, however, that you cannot ever know what I intended to do unless I
did it — for I may have stated, even if not executed, my intention. Nor does
it follow that you cannot know what my intention i trying to do something
was unless I succeeded in doing it — for it is often quite easy to characterize
(to decode the intention im) an attempted but wholly unsuccessful action.
(It may be quite clear, for example, that Defoe intended a parody in
writing his Experiment, even though the intention was so disastrously
misunderstood that we might well say of the intended action that it was
unsuccessfully performed.) A further misunderstanding, however, seems to
be revealed by those who have criticized this attack of Collingwood’s on
the idea of perennial problems. It has even been insisted, for example, in an

=== p. 66 ===

  important recent discussion, that when ‘Lenin says that every cook ought
  to be a politician and Plato that men ought to restrict themselves to the
  exercise of their special function in the state’, then this is for Plato and
  Lenin to be concerned with the ‘same problem’, so that it is merely an a
  priori judgement to deny that any perennial issue is involved.?°* But the
  claim on which historians of ideas have insisted has not merely been that
  there may be some semantic sameness of this kind, but that the problem is
  the same in the sense that we may hope directly to learn from a study of the
  solution Plato offers of it. It is this sameness, indeed, which is said to
  constitute the whole reason for studying Plato’s Replublic.*® But it is in this
  sense that the problem simply cannot be the same in both cases at all. For if we
  are to learn from Plato, it is not enough that the discussion should seem, at a
  very abstract level, to pose a question relevant to us. It is also essential that
  the answer Plato gave should seem relevant and indeed applicable (if he is
  ‘right’) to our own culture and period. As soon as we begin to study Plato’s
  actual arguments, however, the sense in which the issue of participation is
  the same for himself and ourselves dissolves into absurdity. What we are
  most likely to learn from Plato is that the cook should not_participate
  because he is a slave. It is hard to see what problems of participation
  in modern representative democracies are likely to be advanced by
- the application of this particular piece of perennial wisdom, decisive
  though the argument would undoubtedly have seemed to Plato himself.
     This reformulation and insistence on the claim that there are no perennial
  problems in philosophy, from which we can hope to learn directly through
  sstudying the classic texts, is not of course intended as a denial of the
  possibility that there may be propositions (perhaps in mathematics) the
  truth of which is wholly tenseless. (This does not yet amount to showing
  that their truth is any less contingent for that.) It is not even a denial of
  the possibility that there may be apparently perennial questions, if these
  are sufficiently abstractly framed. All I wish to insist is that whenever
  it is claimed that the point of the historical study of such questions is
  that we may learn directly from the answers, it will be found that what
  counts as an answer will usually look, in a different culture or period, so
  different in itself that it can hardly be in the least useful even to go on
  thinking of the relevant question as being ‘the same’ in the required sense
  at all. More crudely: we must learn to do our own thinking for ourselves.
     It is by no means my conclusion, however, that because the philosophical
  value at present claimed for the history of ideas rests on a misconception, it
  must follow that the subject has no philosophical value in itself at all. For
  it is the very fact that the classic texts are concerned with their own quite
  alien problems, and not the presumption that they are somehow concerned
  with our_ own problems as well, which seems to me to give not the lie
  but the key to the indispensable value of studying the history of ideas.

=== p. 67 ===

The classic texts, especially in social, ethical, and political thought, help to
reveal — if we let them — not the essential sameness, but rather the essential
variety of viable moral assumptions and political commitments. It is in this,
moreover, that their essential philosophical, even moral, value can be seen to
lie. There is a tendency (sometimes explicitly urged, as by Hegel, as a mode
of proceeding) to suppose that the best, not merely the inescapable, point
of vantage from which to survey the ideas of the past must be that of our
present situation, because it is by definition the most highly evolved. Such
a claim cannot survive a recognition of the fact that historical differences
over fundamental issues may reflect differences of intention and convention
rather than anything like a competition over a community of values, let
alone anything like an evolving perception of the Absolute. To recognize,
moreover, that our own society is no different from any other in having its
own local beliefs and arrangements of social and political life is already to
have reached a quite different and, I should wish to argue, a very much more            N
                                                                                        ET
                                                                                        PL
                                                                                        Pee
                                                                                        A
                                                                                        ee
                                                                                         ea
                                                                                          V
salutary point of vantage. A knowledge of the history of such ideas can then
serve to show the extent to which those features of our own arrangements
which we may be disposed to accept as traditional or even ‘timeless’                     +
                                                                                          MY
                                                                                          A
truths204 may in fact be the merest contingencies of our peculiar history
and social structure. To discover from the history of thought that there are
in fact no such timeless concepts, but only the various different concepts
which have gone with various different societies, is to discover_a_ general
truth not merely about the past but about ourselves as well. Furthermore, it
is commonplace — we are all Marxists to this extent — that our own society
places unrecognized constraints upon our imaginations. It deserves, then,
to become a commonplace that the historical study of the ideas ofother
societies should be undertaken as the indispensable and the irreplacable
means of placing limits on those constraints. The allegation that the history
of ideas consists of nothing more than ‘outworn metaphysical notions’,
which is frequently advanced at the moment, with terrifying parochialism,
as a reason for ignoring such a history, would then come to be seen as
the very reason for regarding such histories as indispensably ‘relevant’, not
because crude ‘lessons’ can be picked out of them, but because the history
                                                                                        Ce
                                                                                        tide
                                                                                        eS
                                                                                         at
                                                                                          me
                                                                                          a
                                                                                          Shce
itself provides a lesson in self-knowledge. To demand from the history of
thought a solution to our own immediate problems is thus to commit not
merely a methodological fallacy, but something like a moral error. But to
fearn from the past — and we cannot otherwise learn at all — the distinction        ae   len
                                                                                         Fr
                                                                                          a
                                                                                          .

between what is necessary and what is the product merely of our own
                                                                                              ~~

contingent arrangements, is to learn the key to self-awareness itself.?0°
                   Hut Huis suggests Hnact rare is r\0 combinorhy or wononenality
           to socussine ays of Weshecn wnlirzabon ode Manel ofunnanse wily
            in gprecad. Bot surely    come suchiomm paalhy #xisls thenhe dlassic
           forts canlatlooth Inistecvally    condhand Cand thus rereleuent andlor
           Teathonasy     r Jaros cesptts and uns                voliant. Lae
          netting in Skwwer's acguinint Host otters apes C AASDAS Torsugpos.ng           Pa
                                                                                         Q,
                                                                                         Wes
                                                                                          Pe
                                                                                           SA>a

                                                                                    a

