=== chunk: tully-1988-meaning-and-context/ch5-some-problems ===
title: Some problems in the analysis of political thought and action
source_pdf: docs/sources/tully-1988-meaning-and-context/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 111-132
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 97
plan_page_end: 118
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 97 ===

                                      5                    ;
     Some problems in the analysis of
       political thought and action

I am most grateful to Professors Schochet and Wiener not just for
their generosity in commenting on my work, but also for their accuracy
in reporting my arguments and their perceptiveness as critics.! It seems
possible to respond to their remarks in one of two ways. One would
be to pursue the implications of Wiener’s article and try to provide
some more historical information about the context of Hobbes’ political
thought. This strikes me as an attractive alternative, especially since I agree
with his suggestion that I ought to devote more attention to analysing
the nature of the social pressures which helped to prompt Hobbes and
his sympathizers to espouse their peculiar brand of absolutism. (He does
not mention, however, that this theme has already been brilliantly explored
                                                                                  Sreck os
by K. V. Thomas.)* The other alternative is to say something more
about my general approach to the study of political theory, of which              Mis .
my work on Hobbes (as Schochet and Wiener both acknowledge) has
mainly been intended to serve as an example. This strikes me as even
more attractive, and it is this line of argument which I shall pursue.
   There are two main reasons for this choice. One is my wish to defend
myself against a number of attacks which have recently been mounted on the
methodological and philosophical essays in which I have tried to formulate
my approach to studying the history of political thought. The first of these
was published in 1970 by Dr Leslie in Political Studies. This was followed by
more technical criticism by Dr Mew in the Philosophical Quarterly. Two
further critical articles appeared in 1973, one by Dr Parekh and Dr Berki
in the Journal of the History of Ideas, the other by Professor Tarlton in
History and Theory. And now Professor Schochet has added a further series

=== p. 98 ===

of criticisms as the conclusion to the account he has given of my work.?
   My first aim in what follows will be to discuss these critics, some of
whom, I cannot help feeling, have sometimes misstated my case. Parekh
and Berki, for example, begin by promising what they call a detailed critical
appreciation, but they then go on to concentrate on a single methodological
article (for which they give the wrong reference) without ever indicating that
it was presented as one of a series or that it was underpinned by a number
of historical examples. Although most of my critics have been much more
scrupulous, I still feel that what is needed is not the abandonment of my
approach (as they all suggest) and still less the acknowledgement of its
impossibility (as Schochet in particular demands), but simply an attempt
to provide a more careful and less polemical statement of my central
claims. I hope this will serve to remove a number of misconceptions,
as well as to show that my argument in fact emerges more or less
unscathed from the criticisms which have so far been directed against it.
   My chief reason, however, for concentrating on these methodological
questions is my hope that this may also serve to uncover two implications
of my approach, both of which perhaps deserve to be more fully pursued.
The first of these (which I shall consider in section I) concerns the question
of what precisely ought to be studied in the history of political thought —
whether we ought mainly to focus on the traditional canon of so-called
‘classic texts’, on the leading traditions of political analysis, or perhaps on
the entire ‘language’ of-politics at a given time. The other implication I wish
to examine (to which I shall turn in section II) is concerned with the intractably large but crucial question of how to analyse the relations between the
professed principles and the actual practices of political life. My main aim
in what follows is to avoid merely repeating myself in a clearer voice, and
to move on — however sketchily — to a consideration of these further points.

The aims of my earliest methodological essays, in 1966 and 1969, were
avowedly polemical, with the result — which I now mildly regret — that
they were written in a tone of ‘enthusiasm’ for which I have recently
been rebuked.+ My primary concern was to expose the weaknesses of two
prevailing assumptions about the study of the classic texts in the history of
political thought. One of these, to which Parekh and Berki unrepentantly
return, was the belief that ‘in some cases the source of a text’s intelligibility
lies within itself and its understanding does not require the commentator to
consider its context’.’ The other was the belief that a satisfactory history

=== p. 99 ===

can be constructed out of the ‘unit ideas’ contained in such texts, or else
out of linking such texts together in a chain of alleged influences. As
Wiener has indicated, my reason for attacking these methodologies was
my sense that they had given rise to a number of exegetically plausible
but historically incredible interpretations of the classic texts. I took the
case of Hobbes’ Leviathan and tried to show that this applied both
to Warrender’s and Hood’s interpretations, as well as to Strauss’s and
Macpherson’s accounts of Hobbes’ place in seventeenth-century thought.®
   Although this was intended to be revisionist, there was at least one
crucial point at which the assumptions governing my approach were of
a wholly conventional kind. As Schochet observes, | assumed throughout
that the classic texts were worthy of study in themselves, and that the
attempt to understand them ought to be treated as one of the leading
aims in any history of political thought. This makes it unfair of Tarlton
to claim that the objects of analysis in my proposed methodology remained
‘vaguely and arbitrarily specified’.? My concern was in fact with the same
objects which had always been analysed — the ‘select few books’, as a
recent author has called them, which, for whatever reasons, ‘have been
raised to the status of “classics”’.8 My original aim was merely to analyse
the nature of the conditions which are necessary and perhaps sufficient for
an understanding of any one of these texts. As Wiener points out, I tried
to establish that one of the necessary conditions must be the recovery of
the historical meaning of the text. I thus concluded that it can never be
sufficient in itself (pace Parekh and Berki) to be able to supply even
the most plausible and coherent internal analysis of their arguments.
    This approach has been assailed, however, both for being excessively historical and for not being historical enough. The latter criticism, as Schochet
notes, is one which I suggested myself in my earliest methodological article.
I should now be more inclined to emphasize it. We can hardly claim to be
concerned with the history of political theory unless we are prepare to write
it as real history — that is, as the record of an actual activity, and in particular
as the history of ideologies. Such a history would have many values, quite
apart from providing us for the first time with a realistic picture of how
political thinking in all its various forms was carried on in the past. It would
enable us to illuminate the varying roles played by intellectual factors in
political life. It would thus enable us to begin to establish the connections
between the world of ideology and the world of           political action. And this

history which seems at the moment to be missing even in the work of its most
distinguished practitioners. (It has become a commonplace, for example,
that this is the major weakness of Braudel’s attempt to write ‘total history’.)
It is clear, however, that the chief obstacle to writing such a history of social
and political ideas is constituted by our continuing tendency to concentrate

=== p. 100 ===

on the received canon of classic texts. They impose a distorting perspective
when we try to write historically about the development of social and political ideas. And they encourage the adoption of a naive diffusionist account
of the relations between the work of leading social theorists and the popular
acceptance of new social and political attitudes. As an example of the first
danger, consider the attempt of Professor C. B. Macpherson to write the history of ‘possessive individualism’, and the unhistorical level of abstraction
at which the whole work proceeds.? As an example of the second, consider
the attempts which have recently been made to vindicate the influence of
Bentham’s ideas on the development of nineteenth-century social policies.!°
    It is possible, however, to endorse this line of criticism (as I do) and
still feel that a caveat needs to be entered against the over-enthusiastic
adoption of a completely sociological approach, through which the object
of analysis becomes nothing less than the whole gamut of ‘languages’ in
which a nation articulates its political experience over time.!! There is a
danger that this new sociology, when writ large, will turn out to be nothing
more than the most discredited form of inductivism in fashionable disguise.
This danger has already become apparent in the recent historiography of
the history of scientific ideas, in which the old, ‘internal’ history of rational
discoveries has tended to be superseded in favour of the attempt to gain ‘a
full picture of the new science’.!2 The problems this is likely to generate
are strictly analogous to those in the history of political ideas, and have
recently been excellently discussed.!3 If we try to produce ‘the full picture’,
we are bound sooner rather than later to be reduced merely to colouring-in
the most boring and trivial details. We are-in any case bound to fail. For the
facts are infinite in number, and unless we have some ideas about where to
begin and why to begin there, we may literally condemn ourselves to going
on for ever. It follows that we must be prepared to make some crucial
decisions at the outset about what deserves to be studied and what is
best ignored. It will not do, moreover, to accept the solution proposed
by Butterfield and the other opponents of ‘whig’ history, who have argued
that, even if we proceed in this way, we must be careful to ‘adopt the
outlook’ and apply only those criteria of significance which were current
 and accepted at the relevant historical time.14 It is highly implausible to
 suppose that there will ever be such an agreement about what matters in
 any historical period. But even if there happens to be complete agreement
 amongst their contemporaries that certain writers do not matter, we can
 scarcely hope to write satisfactory history if we are content merely to
 endorse such judgements. This would be to leave us, for example, with
 a history of seventeenth-century ethical theory in which Spinoza is totally
 ignored, a history of nineteenth-century logical theory in which Frege is
 barely mentioned, and so on. It seems essential, in short, to place a very
 strong emphasis on what seems a very obvious point: that the decisions we

=== p. 101 ===

have to make about what to study must be our own decisions, arrived at
by applying our own criteria for judging what is rational and significant.
   Once this insight is restored to its rightful status as a commonplace,
however, it begins to seem possible both to endorse the value of a strictl
historical approach to the study     of political thought, and yet to allow that
a_certain primacy still deserves to be assigned to studying the traditional
canon of classic texts. This assumes, of course (as I have always assumed),
that to speak of a text as a classic is to imply that there may be special
reasons for wishing to understand it.           The degree of primacy which this
assigns to the classic texts is simply that they become one obvious focus
around which it might seem appropriate to organize some of our historical
researches. I do not say that they represent the sole or even the most
interesting focus we might choose. As I have already hinted, and hope
by the end of this article to make clear, I believe that the question of
the relations between political ideology and action suggests a wide and
more fruitful field for new research. I certainly agree, however, that the
classic texts continue to provide us with one potential answer to the
inescapable question of where our historical researches ought to begin,
and one potential means of investing them with their point.
   It may seem, however, that this conclusion merely serves to underline the
alternative criticism, to the effect that this represents an excessively historical approach for a political scientist to endorse. This is the main criticism
which Leslie makes. My approach is said to involve a paradoxical commitment, since it begins by presupposing the value of seeking to understand the
classic texts, but ends by proposing a method of studying which ‘threatens
to destroy the very treasure we seek, leaving only the dust of scholarship’.!5
Tarlton has repeated the same fear and expressed it as a certainty. My plea
for ‘strict historicity’ is said to make it ‘difficult to see how, even if it were
workable, anything might issue that would be of any more than the dustiest
antiquarian interest’.!6 I fail to see, however, why it should be thought to
follow from questioning the immediate relevance of the classic texts that we
are bound to be left with nothing but antiquarian scholarship. To proffer
these as exhaustive alternatives is simply to discount the point I have been
seeking to emphasize: that if we are interested in such issues as the process
of ideological formation and change, we cannot avoid involving ourselves
in extensive historical enquiries; and if we are genuinely concerned to
understand such issues, it seems only sensible to demand that these enquiries
should be conducted with as much care and exactitude as possible.
   My reply to this second line of criticism is thus the same as before.
Although the analysis of political ideology is inescapably a historical
subject, it is the merest parochialism to imply that this constitutes a
reason for refusing to assign it the place which it clearly deserves in any
academic study of politics. It is true that Tarlton professes to find this

=== p. 102 ===

type of answer ‘too thin to be considered an’authentic confrontation of the
problem’.!7 He gives no grounds for this judgement, however, and in the
absence of any such argument I still cannot see whatsis so unsatisfactory
about this conclusion. I originally felt encouraged in reaching it by
the fact that a number of social philosophers (for example, Professor
MacIntyre) had already made use of a similar set of assumptions in
producing some important contributions to ethical and political thought.!8
Since then, I have been heartened to find some congenial arguments
presented by a number of political theorists who have no connections with
the ‘school’ which Tarlton castigates for its alleged absorption with itself.!?
   All this brings me to what is obviously the main question: How
is the recovery of the historical meaning of a_text_to_be achieved?
As Schochet implies, it may be that the polemical organization of my
original articles prevented me from stating my positive answer to this
question with sufficient clarity. My original answer, however, was a very
simple one. I argued that the key to excluding unhistorical meanings must
lie in limiting our range of descriptions of any          given text to those
which the author himself might in principle have avowed and that

lie in recovering the complex intentions of the author in writing it.
   I should now like to make three qualifying remarks about this doctrine, in
the hope of removing a number of misunderstandings of my present views.
The first is that its application was always intended to be limited in two ways
which I tried to spell out. These are perhaps worth stressing, since some of
my critics have chosen to ignore them and have, in consequence, devoted
themselves to the demolition of a position which I have never wished to
defend. I have been criticized (by Parekh and Berki) for assuming that we can
speak as though the author of a complex work had ‘a definite “intention”
in performing a single action to bring about a definite result’.2° But I have
never made such an assumption. I have rejected it as explicitly as possible,
in the hope that this misunderstanding might be avoided (4:86). Second,
I have been criticized (again by Parekh and Berki, and also by Tarlton) for
assuming that the tasks of recovering and stating an author’s intentions
may be ‘sufficient in themselves for a proper understanding of the work
in question’.2! But again I have never made such an assumption. I have
tried to prevent precisely this misunderstanding by insisting as strongly as
possible (the italics are in the original) that ‘I have been concerned only’
to argue ‘that amongst the interpreter’s tasks must be the recovery of the
author’s intentions’. I have sought to distinguish this argument ‘from the
much stronger claim which is often advanced’ to the effect that ‘the recovery
of these intentions’ must ‘form the whole of the interpreter’s task’ (3:76).
   My second remark is that I have never been concerned to suggest that
there is anything particularly dramatic or original about my argument.

=== p. 103 ===

Tarlton is quite correct to speak of my debt to Mr Dunn’s and Professor
Pocock’s recent writings, and all three of us have in turn acknowledged the
influence which R. G. Collingwood has exercised over our methodological
studies. It is worth stressing this important common source, for Parekh
and Berki have devoted much of their space to ‘explaining’ how I have
come to occupy my present intellectual position, and they allege that the
‘most conspicuous tradition’ on which I have drawn is ‘closely linked
with logical positivism’.2? The fact that I have explicitly pointed to
Collingwood as a major intellectual influence, coupled with the fact
that Collingwood is unquestionably the leading anti-positivist Idealist
in recent English philosophy, is perhaps enough to suggest the preposterousness of their argument at this point.
   My final qualification is that | now feel this original statement of my
position — on which it happens that most of my critics have concentrated
— to have been defective in at least two respects. First, it relied on the idea
that every agent has a privileged access to his own intentions, as a way of
‘closing the context’ on the historical meaning of a text. | now accept that
I may have applied this notion too rigidly, as Dr J. W. Burrow has since
implied.23 I have also become more convinced about certain difficulties
in the theory itself, which a number of philosophers have more recently
explored.?4 I have since become clearer, moreover, that I have no real need
to rely on this theory in order to establish my own case, and I have gone on
to restate this aspect of my argument in such a way as to leave it free of this
fault. The other defect in my original presentation was that I misused the
argument which I borrowed from J. L. Austin about the ‘illocutionary force’
of utterances. I tried to employ it in the course of an attack on the idea that
political theories are merely derivations from political practices, an attack
which I now feel completely misfired (2:56 — 63). Since then I believe I
have made use of this argument in a more satisfactory way (3; 4). I        do
not feel, however, tl         ve ever managed to provide a satisfactory repl
to the epiphenomenalist case, and for this reason I should like to address
myself again to this task in the second half of these present remarks.
   Several of my critics (notably Parekh and Berki) write as though I
had never made any attempt to repair these defects or to refine and
extend the original presentation of my case. As Tarlton very fairly
indicates, however, I have since moved on to focus on the concept of a
convention, and especially the conventions surrounding the performance of
complex linguistic acts, in an attempt to provide a more effective though
closely related means of ‘closing the context’ on the historical meanings
of texts. I have sought in particular to ask questions about what a given
writer may have been doing, and to answer them by appealing to the
extent to which his intentions must necessarily have been conventional
if they included the intention to communicate and_be_ understood (3). I

=== p. 104 ===

have also tried to strengthen these purely methodological considerations
by locating their foundations in the logic of explanation. I have tried, that
is, to show how the recovery of an agent’s intentions and the conventions
surrounding them can serve to provide a valid (though not a causal)
form of explanation for at least some of his voluntary actions (4).7°
   I do not wish to pretend that this somewhat ambitious extension of my
original argument has left it entirely free of difficulties. I accept the criticism
which Mew has made, by means of some ingenious counter-examples, of
my attempt to argue that it must invariably be necessary to invoke a set of
social as well as linguistic conventions in order to decode the intended force
of certain utterances.26 I am also grateful to acknowledge the refinements
which have since been suggested by Dr Close and Professor Hancher in
the course of the generally congenial comments which both of them have
made about my recent accounts of authorial intentionality.2” And I should
like to emphasize my feeling that before anyone can hope to argue with
confidence about these issues, a great deal more work will have to be done
on the analysis of the concept of a convention, especially in relation to
the idea of someone’s meaning something by saying or doing something.28
   Nevertheless, I see no reason to doubt that my argument in its revised
and extended form is capable of sustaining both the main conclusions on
which I have sought to insist: that the recovery of the historical meanin
of any given text is a necessary condition of understanding it, and that this
process can never be achieved simply by studying the text itself. Even Parekh
and Berki seem prepared to concede that this is sometimes true, though
they insist that in other cases ‘the context is negligible and the audience
Mote                                        They go on to argue that ‘perhaps
the most obvious case’ of a classic text which ‘makes eminent sense on its
own’ and ‘has no specific context and no limited and identifiable audience’ is
the case of Hobbes’ Leviathan.2? | agree that Leviathan is probably the most
plausible candidate, but one of the main purposes of my historical articles
about Hobbes has been to establish that even in this case such an assumption
would in fact be misplaced. Unless we are prepared to ask questions about
what Hobbes is doing in Leviathan, and to seek the answers by relating his
work to the prevailing conventions of political argument at the time, we can
never hope to elucidate the precise character of his counter-revolutionary
theory of political obligation, nor can we hope to understand the precise role
of his epistemology in relation to his political thought. If we are prepared,
however, to consider Leviathan in relation to its appropriate intellectual
and ideological context, we can readily begin to answer these questions,
and in this way to add to our understanding of the work. We can also
begin to see the extent to which, even if Hobbes may have had the ambition
to_speak ‘transhistorically’ (which I have never soughtght to deny),
                                                              deny), his work
                                                                          work
was addressed to a strictly limited and precisely identifiable audience,

=== p. 105 ===

   My reasons for insisting on these conclusions have been very fairly
paraphrased by Wiener, and there is no need to rehearse them here.
Since Parekh and Berki evidently reject them outright, I can only conclude
that they find my historical arguments in some way grossly defective.
It is a disappointing feature of their critique, however, that they offer
no comments on the new information which I have sought to present
about the context of Hobbes’ thought, and in consequence give no
reasons for their flat rejection of my claims. They simply insist, on the
contrary, that I have never made any attempt to corroborate my general
methodological claims by any ‘detailed investigation of past thinkers’.3°
   I am prepared to admit, however, that my alleged discoveries about
Hobbes may well be controversial in some way, so I shall revert instead to
a simpler example, which I have considered before and which can equally
well be used to substantiate both my central claims. Locke, in his Two
Treatises, makes no appeal to the prescriptive force of the ancient English
constitution. An examination of the prevailing conventions of debate about
political obligation at the time reveals that this was an extremely unusual
lacuna for him to have left in his argument. This may well lead us to ask
what Locke may have been doing here. We are bound to answer that he
was rejecting and repudiating one of the most widespread and prestigious
forms of political argument at the time. We may also be led to question
whether he may not have had the intention to shift the discussion of political
obligation onto a more abstract level at this point, by ignoring the claims of
prescription and arguing entirely in terms of the concepts of natural law and
natural rights. This seems to substantiate both my central claims. We can
scarcely be said to have understood Locke’s text until we have considered
what he was doing at this crucial stage in his argument. But we can never
hope to attain such an understanding simply be reading the text itself
‘over and over again’ in the way that some commentators have urged.3!
   It is not difficult, moreover, to defend this basic methodological commitment against the chief accusation which has been levelled against it.
According to Parekh and Berki, it ‘means the denial of the possibility of
new insights and experience’.32 According to Tarlton, it involves denying
that some writers ‘operate at or beyond the boundaries of established
“languages”’.33 And, according to Schochet, we may become ‘blinded to
such goals’ as innovation and ‘creativity’ if we follow this approach. This
                                                                          ————~

accusation seems to rest on a confusion between the unexceptionable claim
that any agent who is engaged in an intended act of communication must
be limited by the prevailing conventions of discourse, eeand ee    further claim
                                                              theBOE  PEPE Pe

that he must be limited only to following these conventions. I have obviously
never intended to commit myself to the absurdity of denying that it is open
fo any writer to indicate that his aim is to extend, to subvert, or in some
other way   to alter a prevailing set of accepted        tions
                                                  conventions   and   attitudes.I
                                                                                Jf

=== p. 106 ===

am astonished to be told that my approach would make it impossible to map
out this kind of innovation and change. It seems to me, on the contrary, that
I am providing the means — the only sure means — 0 exhibiting the precise
character of these changes, and of indicating the precise moment at which
they actually took place. This can readily be seen if I revert to the example
T have just cited from Locke’s Two Treatises. It is only if and when we have
mapped out all the prevailing conventions of political discussion that we
can begin to observe the points at which, and the extent to which, Locke
may be concerned to breach or repudiate them. So far from denying such
moments of creativity, my approach seems in this way to provide the only
means of recognizing and illuminating them in a genuinely historical way.
   I should like finally to claim one special merit for my approach which I
have not previously discussed. I believe it provides a means of avoiding a
weakness which otherwise seems endemic in any attempt to take the idea
of a ‘language’ or a tradition as a unit of study in the history of political
thought. I am not, of course, hostile to these aims themselves, for my own
attempt to focus on the conventions of political argument obviously tends
to culminate in a study of genres and traditions of discourse. It would hardly
seem necessary to offer this reassurance, were it not that Parekh and Berki
have reported me as saying that it can never be justifiable for an intellectual
historian to write ‘in terms of traditions, periods, schools of thought and
the like’.34 It is hard to see how they have gained this impression. As
I have tried to make*clear, I share the enthusiasm which they register
for attempts such as those of Professor Greenleaf to write about leading
traditions of political analysis, even though I cannot entirely endorse their
claim (for reasons which | have given at length elsewhere) that Greenleaf
has in fact achieved this result ‘without any distortion’.35 (I also find it
surprising that they give the wrong title for a book which they single out as
so well known.) I do feel, however, that if Greenleaf’s stress on traditions
or Pocock’s on languages are treated as methodologies in themselves, they
are prone to generate at least two difficulties. There is an obvious danger
that if we merely focus on the relations between the vocabulary used by
a given writer and the traditions to which he may appear connected by
his use of this vocabulary, we may become insensitive to instances of
irony, obliquity, and other cases in which the writer may seem to be
saying something other than what he means. The chief danger, however,
is that if we merely concentrate on the language of a given writer, we may
run the risk of assimilating him to a completely alien intellectual tradition,
and thus of misunderstanding the whole aim of his political works.
   An obvious example of the first danger is provided by the work of
Bayle, as I have sought to illustrate elsewhere      (2:51 — 3). An obvious
example of the second is provided by the recent discussions of Bolingbroke’s
political works. It happens to be Bolingbroke, the arch-enemy of the whigs,

=== p. 107 ===

who supplies in his main political works the clearest summary of a number
of radically whig and especially Harringtonian political beliefs. It is, of
course, necessary to focus on the political traditions which Bolingbroke
was exploiting in order to be able to expose this paradox, and this
has been the great strength of the recent commentaries. Their great
weakness, however, has been their incapacity to go on to explain or
even to comment on this puzzle. They have merely left us with the
question-begging observation that ‘Bolingbroke, the tory, shows whiggish
traits’ and with the potentially misleading characterization of Bolingbroke
as ‘the most spectacular of the neo-Harringtonians’.3¢
   I am suggesting that what is needed, in order to be able to carry the
argument beyond this rather unsatisfactory point, is not merely to indicate
the traditions of discourse to which a given writer may be appealing, but
also to ask what he may be doing when he appeals to the language of
those particular traditions. Since many different things can always be done
by different writers with a given ‘language’, the focus ought not, I think, to
be on the language or the traditions in themselves, but rather on the range
of things which can in principle be done with them (and to them) at any
given time. To cite the prevailing jargon, what we need to go on to ask is
what range of speech-acts can standardly be performed by a given writer
when he makes use of a given set of concepts or terms. If this further
question had been asked in the case of Bolingbroke, for example, I believe
it could have been shown that one of his main aims in his political works
may not so much have been to articulate a set of political principles in
which he necessarily believed himself, but rather to remind his opponents
of the principles which they professed to believe. (I have recently sought
to demonstrate this conclusion.)37 If we merely focus on the language of
Bolingbroke’s political works and the traditions with which he appears to
align himself, this level of analysis will remain closed off. If we go on to
engage with it, however, we may be able to answer the questions which
are currently being begged, and so to reach a new level of understanding in
our study of these and many other historically important political works.

                                      I

The final outcome of my approach, according to several of my critics,
is a refusal to assign any causal role to political ideas or principles in
relation to the explanation of political actions and events. It is true that
they have sometimes confused this with the rather different accusation
which I have already considered, to the effect that my approach is
incapable of accommodating the novel insights which are characteristically
found in the most creative political works. It is clear, however, that when

=== p. 108 ===

        Parekh and Berki accuse me of ‘not seeing anything else in politics
        beyond its immediate, pragmatic aspects’, what they have in mind is my
        alleged failure to recognize the influence of general ideological structures
        upon the world of political events.38 And Tarlton appears to have
        the same criticism in mind when he eventually insists on aligning me
        with those who believe that the world of thought ‘merely reflects an
nasty   underlying and somehow more real world of non-linguistic activity’         .>?
           I feel somewhat aggrieved by these criticisms, since one of my main hopes,
        in proposing a more ideological subject matter for the history of political
        thought, was that this might enable us more readily to exhibit the dynamic
        nature of the relationship which I believe to exist between the professed
        principles and the actual practices of political life (2:56 — 9). I still feel that
        the suggestion I originally made about the way in which this relationship
        might be analysed was correct as far as it went — the suggestion that it
        might be possible to make use of the approach and the insights afforded by
        the theory of speech-acts. It may well be, however, that I have brought this
        particular misunderstanding upon myself. For, as I have already conceded,
        the first attempt I made to formulate and apply this theory was undoubtedly
        a failure. It is for this reason that I should now like to revert to my
        original suggestion and attempt to explore it in an entirely new direction.
           There seem to be two main types of situation in which a professed
        principle is capable of making a difference to a social or political action,
        and a fortiori needs to be cited in order to explain it. The most obvious
        case is where the principle serves as the motive for the action. To explain
        a voluntary action is normally to cite the end which the agent desires to
        bring about — corresponding to his motive for acting — together with
        his belief that the performance of the given action will conduce to the
        attainment of the desired end. If the agent professes to be acting for
        the sake of a principle, and if the principle he cites is genuinely his
        motive for acting, it is obvious that the principle makes a difference
        to the action and thus needs to be cited to explain it.
           The question is whether this simple structure of concepts can ever be
        applied to analyse the relations between an ideology and a complex course
        of social or political action. One recent attempt to apply it in this way has
        been made by a number of historians and political scientists who have
        been anxious to repudiate the influential scepticism expressed by Sir Lewis
        Namier and his followers about the role of ideological factors in political
        life. Professor Holmes, for example, has attempted to construct his massive
        account of British Politics in the Age of Anne around the belief that the
        political conflicts of the age were not merely concerned with ‘power and
        the quest for office’, as all the Namierites have alleged, but were ‘concerned
        with real issues, involving the conflict of sincerely-held principles’.49 And
        Professor Kramnick has similarly attempted to analyse the politics of the

=== p. 109 ===

Opposition parties in early eighteenth-century England in terms of the
assumption that the protagonists were genuinely motivated by ‘political
ideals and principles’ and not just by ‘the common interest of the outsider’.4!
   Despite such recent examples, however, it still seems a safe generalization
to say that this sort of attempt to treat principles as sufficient conditions of
actions has by now been fairly generally abandoned. One reason might seem
to be the doubts which a number of philosophers (particularly some of the
followers of Wittgenstein) have expressed about the underlying assumption
that motives are causes. I do not myself feel, however, that there is any
reason to quarrel with this assumption, the difficulties of which seem to
have been somewhat exaggerated (4:86 — 9). The most obvious reason
is simply that a number of the most powerful currents in modern social
theory have converged in rejecting this way of analysing the direction of
the causality between principles and actions. This applies not merely to the
Namierites, but even more clearly to the Marxists (at least in certain moods)
and more recently to behaviourists. They have all insisted, for different rea—_______—                    .   .                   .   .          .

sons, on the same two claims. First, that the principles professed in political
life arecommonly the merest rationalizations of quite different motives and

common claim, such principles are usually invented _ex post facto, merely
in order to invest political behaviour with a quite spurious ‘appearance of
logic and rationality’.4? Second, that it follows from this that such principles
play no causal role in political life, and scarcely even need to figure in
eonsequence/invexplanations’
                 efpolitical: behaviour, sAs/Namier/again’ puts
the point, such ‘party names and cant’ provide _us with no guide at all
when we are trying to explain ‘the underlying realities’ of political life.45
   It is often implied, moreover, that this is the end of the story. This is
due to the fact that even those who have sought to oppose these claims
have generally accepted the same basic assumption about the nature of the
causal relation between political thought and action. They have tended,
that is, to concede that what they must show, in order to vindicate the
relevance of someone’s professed principles in explaining their social and
political actions, is that many political agents (as Butterfield insists in his
polemic against the Namierites) are in fact ‘sincerely attached to the ideals’
for the sake of which they characteristically profess to act.44 But this is
simply to endorse their opponents’ basic assumption, which amounts to
the claim (as Namier’s account sufficiently indicates) that the question
of the relationship between political thought and action is equivalent to
the empirical question of whether an agent’s professed political principles
ever serve as the motives of his political actions. The result has been to
make it seem obvious that political principles have no role to play in the
explanation of political behaviour. For as soon as this basic assumption
is accepted by the opponents of this sort of epiphenomenalism, they are

=== p. 110 ===

committed to sustaining the empirical claim (which intuitively may seem
rather implausible) that the sincere attachment of political agents to their
professed principles actually constitutes their standard motive for political
action. And this, in turn, allows their opponents (such as the Namierites)
to present the epiphenomenalist case in the form of a simple appeal to
realism and common experience. All they have to do is to take their
stand on the alternative empirical claim (which is usually taken to be far
more plausible) that ‘political ideals’, as one of Namier’s disciples has put
it, are ‘rarely in themselves the determinants of human action’.*> Since it
is agreed that a principle can only make a difference if it is a motive, and
since it is intuitively clear that principles are rarely motives, it is obvious,
they conclude, that we do not usually have to refer to an agent’s professed
principles when we come to explain his actual political behaviour.
   It_is this shared assumption, however, which seems to be mistaken.
Even if we concede that an agent’s professed principles are never his real
motives, we are still left with at least one type of situation in which they
are nevertheless capable of making a difference to his behaviour. This is
the situation in which the agent is engaged in a form of social or political
action that is (as I shall put it) in some way untoward, and also possesses a
strong motive for attempting (in Weberian phrase) to legitimate it. Suppose
— to take an example in which Weber himself was interested — the agent
is a merchant engaged in some highly profitable commercial enterprise in
England at the turn of the sixteenth century. His expected profits supply
him with a recognizable and powerful motive for wanting to ensure that
he is able to continue with his enterprise. But the social and religious
standards of the age ensure that the enterprise itself is bound to appear in a
morally and perhaps even a legally dubious light. It is evident that in these
circumstances it becomes desirable, perhaps even essential, for the agent to
be able to describe his behaviour in such a way as to defeat or at least to
override any hostile appraisals of it, and in this way to legitimate what he
is doing to those who may have doubts about the morality of his actions.
   The suggestion I now wish to explore is that, if we concentrate on
the means by which an agent in this type of situation can hope to
legitimate his behaviour, we may be able to uncover a further type
of causal connection between the principles for the sake of which he
professes to act and his actual social or political actions. As a preface to
this discussion, however, it is vital to concede that I have characterized the
situation in an artificially simple way. I have implied that the sole motive
for offering an ideological description of one’s untoward social actions will
normally be to legitimate them to others who may have doubts about their
legality or morality. I have thus implied that there is no reason to suppose
that the agent ever needs to offer these descriptions for his own benefit, or
even needs to believe in them at all. Ihave adopted this tactic, however, only

=== p. 111 ===

                   Analysis ofpolitical thought and action                  tii
in order to avoid having to raise some highly complex and purely empirical
questions which in no way affect the validity of my general argument. It
is obvious that an agent’s motives in this situation will usually be mixed
and complicated, and it is arguable that the need to attain an appropriate
self-image by legitimating his behaviour to himself and his sympathizers
may often be of paramount importance. To preserve the simplicity of the
argument, however, I am willing in what follows to concede what is from
my point of view the hardest case: the situation of an imagined agent who
never actually believes in any of the principles he professes, and whose
principles never serve in consequence as the main motives of his actions.
My aim is to show that even in this case it still does not follow (as the
Namierites, for example, have supposed) that we have no need to refer
to this agent’s professed principles if we wish to explain his behaviour.
   If we now turn to ask how this central task of an innovating ideologist
— that of legitimating untoward social actions — can actually be performed,
the theory of speech-acts immediately seems to provide an important clue to
the answer. A number of recent philosophers of language — having thrown
out as an old piece of positivist bric-a-brac the alleged logical distinction
between factual and evaluative statements — have been able to concentrate
on a group of terms which perform an evaluative as well as a descriptive
function in the language.4¢ They are standardly used to describe individual
actions or states of affairs, and to characterize the motives for the sake of
which these actions can be performed. But if the criteria for applying one
of these terms can be plausibly claimed to be present in a given set of
circumstances, this not only serves to describe the given action or state of
affairs, but also to evaluate it in a certain way. The special characteristic of
this range of descriptive terms is thus that they have a standard application
to perform one of two contrasting ranges of speech-acts. They are standardly
used, that is, to perform such acts as commending (and expressing
approval, etc.) or else of condemning (and expressing disapproval, etc.)
the actions or states of affairs which they are also employed to describe.47
   To focus on this group of terms is to take over an insight developed
by the so-called emotivists in ethical theory, who contrasted the ‘emotive’
with the ‘descriptive’ components of the meaning of ethical terms.48 But
as Urmson has pointed out in applying Austin’s theory of speech-acts to
clarify their account, the emotivists in effect confused what Austin dubbed
the ‘illocutionary’ with the ‘perlocutionary’ sense in which an agent may
succeed in doing something in or by using one of these terms. (Henceforth
I shall inelegantly refer to them as ‘evaluative—descriptive terms’.) The sorts
of perlocutionary effects which an agent may hope to achieve by using these
terms are effects such as inciting or persuading his hearers or readers to
adopt a particular point of view. But the question of whether he succeeds in
realizing such hopes is not primarily a linguistic matter, but simply a matter

=== p. 112 ===

for empirical investigation. The sorts of illocutionary effects, however,
which it is open to an agent to achieve in using these terms, are effects
such as evincing, expressing, and soliciting approval er disapproval of the
actions or states of affairs which he uses them to describe. The question
of whether he succeeds in realizing this sort of intention is essentially
a linguistic matter, a matter of applying the relevant terms correctly.
And it is this fact which gives them their great analytical significance.4?
   It is essentially by manipulating this set of terms that any society
succeeds in establishing and altering its moral identity. It is by describing
and thereby commending certain courses of action as (say) courageous or
honest, while describing and condemning others as treacherous or disloyal,
that we sustain our picture of the actions and states of affairs which we wish
either to disavow or to legitimate. This being so, the task of the innovating
ideologist is a hard but an obvious one. His concern, by definition, is to
legitimate a new range of social actions which, in terms of the existing
ways of applying the moral vocabulary prevailing in his society, are
currently regarded as in some way untoward or illegitimate. His aim
must therefore be to show that a number of existing and favourable
evaluative—descriptive terms can somehow be applied to his apparently
untoward actions. If he can somehow perform this trick, he can thereby
hope to argue that the condemnatory descriptions which are otherwise
liable to be applied to his actions can in consequence be discounted.
   Two footnotes need to be added at this stage of the argument, one
emphatic, the other concessive. The point which perhaps needs to be
emphasized is that, however revolutionary the ideologist concerned _may
be, he will nevertheless be committed, once he has accepted the need
to legitimate his behaviour, to attempting to show that some of the
existing range of favourable evaluative—descriptive terms can somehow be

revolutionary is to this extent obliged to march backwards into battle.
To legitimate his behaviour, he is committed to showing that it can be
described in such a way that those who currently disapprove of it can
somehow be brought to see that they ought to withhold this disapproval
after all. And to achieve this end, he has no option but to show that at
least some of the terms which his ideological opponents use when they
are describing the actions and states of affairs of which they approve can
be applied to include and thus legitimate his own untoward behaviour.
   The concessive point is that the situation in the real world is in at
least one important respect more complicated than my model has so far
implied. It is not simply that the agent tries to apply to his own behaviour
whatever favourable evaluative—descriptive terms are in fact best adapted
to legitimating it. It is rather that he applies those he happens to believe
are best adapted to this purpose. And it is obvious that he may always

=== p. 113 ===

                   Analysis of political thought and action                 it
make a mistake or even an irrational choice in assessing the best means
to attain this desired end. Nevertheless, it still seems correct to begin by
assuming that the agent will have acted in a rational way. I say this not
merely to preserve the simplicity of my general discussion, but also as a
methodological precept when it comes to the discussion of actual examples.
If we begin by assuming the agent’s rationality and find this assumption
borne out, this will provide us with an explanation for the agent’s apparent
belief that he was acting rationally. It will in fact provide us with the best
possible explanation — namely, that he was acting rationally. Conversely,
unless we begin by assuming the agent’s rationality, we leave ourselves with
no means of explaining his behaviour, or even of seeing exactly what there
is to explain about it, if it should happen that he is not acting rationally.
To adopt this methodology is thus to remind ourselves of two important
lessons. Oneis that to exhibit a social action as rational is to explain it. The
other is that to explain why an agent acts as he does must always involve the
capacity to SSE TET
                  y he
                     EET
                       evidently believed
                                     TEit was rational
                                              ee       for him to perform a particular action when it was not in fact rational for him to do so.
   These points can readily be underlined if we revert to the example
of those who were concerned in early seventeenth-century England to
legitimate their novel commercial and capitalist enterprises. They chose
to attempt to legitimate this untoward behaviour in part by seeking to
describe it in terms of the concepts normally used to commend an
ideal of the religious life. It is clear that this was in fact a rational
choice. If they could somehow plausibly apply these concepts to describe
their own behaviour, this would obviously provide them with a most
powerful legitimating device. It was, moreover, plausible to make such
an attempt, since there was a certain element of structural similarity —
which they eagerly exploited — between the specifically Protestant ideal
of individual service and devotion (to God) and the alleged commercial
ideals of service (to one’s customers) and dedication (to one’s work).
   This brings me to the practical question: how_is it possible (in the
above or in any other case) actually to manipulate an existing normative
vocabulary in such a way as to legitimate such new and untoward courses
of action? There may be said to be two distinct_methods, though they
are often confused. (They are systematically confused, for example, by
the writers of dictionaries.) The first consists in effect of manipulating
the standard speech-act potential of an existing set of descriptive terms,
The agent’s aim in this case is to describe his own actions in such a
way as to make it clear (from the context) to his ideological opponents
that even though he may be using a set of terms which are standardly
applied to express disapproval, he is nevertheless using them to express
approval or at least neutrality on this particular occasion. The point
of this strategy is, of course, to challenge his opponents to reconsider

=== p. 114 ===

the feelings of disapproval or even of meré-neutrality which they are
standardly expressing when they use these particular terms.
   There are two main tactics available to the innovating ideologist in
attempting to bring off this first strategy. He may try to introduce some
wholly new_and favourable evaluative—descriptive terms into the language.
There are two     possibilities here. One is simply to coin new_terms_as
the descriptions of alleged new principles, and then to apply them _as

see_commended. This seems to be the tactic which most commentators
have had in mind when they have discussed the phenomenon of ‘altered
meanings and new words’ in political debate.5° This is obviously an
extremely crude device, however, and it is comparatively rare to find
it employed in ideological debate. There is, however, one important
instance of it in the case of the ideology I have mentioned.
                                                         The concept
                                                                   pt
of frugality provides an example of an entirely new term which became
widely used for the first time at the end of the sixteenth century in order
to describe a motive and a form of social action for which approval wa
beginning to be widely sought. The other and far commoner version of this
tactic, however, consists of turning a neutral description into a favourable
evaluative—descriptive term (usually by means of a metaphorical extension
of its uses) and then applying it in virtue of this extended meaning to describe
some course of action which one wishes to see commended. There are many
cases of this sort of transformation in the ideology I have mentioned. The
metaphorical (and, hence, evaluative) uses of such terms as discerning and
penetrating, for example, make their first appearance in the language at
the relevant time in order to describe a range of talents which many
people had come to have a special reason for wishing to see commended.
   The second and bolder tactic consists of varying the range of speech-acts
which are standardly performed with an existing set of unfavourable
evaluative—descriptive terms. Again there are two possibilities here. The
more usual is to apply a term normally used to express disapproval in
such a way as to neutralize this speech-act potential. The agent thus makes
it clear that he intends the action which the term is being used to describe
to be appraised on this occasion in a wholly neutral way. One clear and
ultimately successful instance of this tactic is provided by the concept of
ambition. It was only at the start of the seventeenth century that this term
began to acquire its current neutral uses. It had previously been applied
exclusively to express the strongest possible disapproval of whatever courses
of action it was used to describe. The other and more dramatic possibility
is actually to reverse the standard speech-act potential of the existing and
unfavourable evaluative—descriptive term. An equally clear and successful
example of this tactic, again from the same ideology, is provided by
the concept of shrewdness. Again, before the start of the seventeenth

=== p. 115 ===

century, this term had been used exclusively to express disapproval.
During the ensuing generation, its potential was completely reversed,
giving it the standard use which it still fulfils as a term of approbation.
   It is, of course, conceptually possible, though it seems to be empirically
less usual, to employ a mirror-image of both these tactics as a means of
trying to bring off this first strategy. It is possible in the first place to
coin new and unfavourable evaluative—descriptive terms, and apply them
to describe familiar forms of social behaviour which one may have come
to wish to see condemned. This happened in the case of the ideology I have
been citing with the concept of squandering and of being a spendthrift. Both
these terms became widely used for the first time at the end of the sixteenth
century in order to describe and express a new disapproval of the aristocratic
ideal of conspicuous consumption. It is also possible to turn existing neutral
descriptive terms into unfavourable evaluative—descriptive terms by means
of a metaphorical extension of their uses. Two examples from the same
ideology are provided by the concepts of errant and exorbitant behaviour,
both of which first attained their metaphorical (and hence evaluative)
meanings at the start of the seventeenth century. And, finally, the standard
application of an existing evaluative—descriptive term to express approval
can also be reversed — as happened with the concept of acting obsequiously.
The term was standardly used until the end of the sixteenth century
to express approval and only afterward became a term of disapprobation.
   I now turn to the second strategy, which is both much simpler and of
far greater significance as a legitimating device. This consists, in effect, of
manipulating the criteria for the application of an existing set of favourable
evaluative—descriptive terms. The ideologist’s aim in this case is to insist,
with as much plausibility as he can muster, that, in_spite of any contrary
appearances, a number of favourable evaluative—descriptive terms can in
fact be applied as apt descriptions of his own apparently untoward social
actions. The point of this strategy is to challenge his ideological opponents
to reconsider whether they may not be making an empirical mistake (and
may thus be socially insensitive) in failing to see that the ordinary criteria for
applying an existing range of favourable evaluative—descriptive terms may
be present in the very actions they have been condemning as illegitimate.
   The attempt to make this move is, of course, ideological in the most
pejorative sense, since it depends on the performance of a linguistic
sleight-of-hand. The aim is to argue that a favourable evaluative—descriptive
term is being applied in the ordinary way, while trying at the same time
to drop some of the criteria for applying it, thereby extending the range
of the actions which it can properly be used to describe and commend.
(Again, the mirror-image of this strategy is to try to limit the application
of existing unfavourable evaluative—descriptive terms.) This will fail if too
many of the criteria are dropped, for in this case the fact that the

=== p. 116 ===

term has undergone a ‘change of meaning’ will become too obvious.
But it will also fail if not enough are dropped, for in this case the
capacity of the term to cover and thus to legitimate new forms of
social action will not have been extended after all.
   Despite these difficulties, this probably represents the most widespread
and important form of ideological argument. It was extensively employed
in the case of the ideology I have been citing: by means of it an attempt was
made to connect the principles of Protestant Christianity with the practices
of commercial life. Consider, for example, the use of the two most important
evaluative—descriptive terms in the religious vocabulary of the age, the term
‘providence’ and the term ‘religious’ itself. By the end of the sixteenth
century, it began to be suggested by those who wished to legitimate the
characteristic interestof the commercial classes in being foresightful in monetary affairs that this apparently miserly (and, hence, untoward) pattern of
behaviour ought really to be seen as a commendable working of providence
and thus as a provident form of action. They also began to suggest that their
characteristic interest in punctuality and exactitude ought not to be con-

and thus commended as a genuinely religious form of commitment. The best
proof of the ideological motives at work in these new patterns of social
description and evaluation is provided by the fact that the meanings of
these key evaluative—descriptive terms soon became stretched and confused.
The concept of providence began to be used in good faith (as it is still used)
to refer simply to acting with foresight about monetary affairs, while the
concept of acting religiously came to be used simply to refer to cases of
exact and punctual behaviour. The standardization of these new meanings
both date, as one might expect, from the start of the seventeenth century.
  My main conclusion, which these examples serve to underline, is that
all those who have argued about the relations between social and political
thought and action in the manner of Namierites or the behaviourists have
in effect been involved in a non sequitur. It does not, as they have tended
to suppose, follow from the fact that an agent’s professed principles may be
ex post facto rationalizations that they have no role to play in explaining
his behaviour. As I have sought to emphasize, this argument ignores the
implications of the fact that any agent possesses a standard motive for
attempting to legitimate his untoward social or political actions. This
implies first of all that he will be committed to claiming that his apparently
untoward actions were in fact motivated by some accepted set of social or
political principles. And this in turn implies that, even if the agent is not in
fact moti               of the principles he professes, he will nevertheless be
obliged to behave in such a way that his actions remain compatible with
the claim that these principles genuinely motivated him. To recognize these
implications is to accept that the courses of action open to any rational

=== p. 117 ===

agent in this type of situation must in part be determined by the range of
principles which he can profess with plausibility. There is both a general
and more specific conclusion to be drawn out here. The general conclusion
derives from the fact that any course of action is inhibited from occurring
if it cannot be legitimated. It follows that any principle which helps to
legitimate a course of action must also be amongst the enabling conditions
of its occurrence. The more specific conclusion derives from the fact that
the nature and range of the evaluative concepts which any agent can hope
to apply in order to legitimate his behaviour can in no case be set by the
agent himself. Their availability is a question about the prevailing morality
of the society in which the agent is acting; their_applicability is a question
about the standard meaning and use of the terms involved, and about how
far these can be plausibly stretched. These factors serve as rather specific
constraints and directives to the agent about what precise lines of conduct
afford him the best means of bringing his untoward actions in line with some
accepted principle, and thereby legitimating what he does while still gaining
what he wants. He cannot hope to stretch the application of the existing
principles indefinitely; correspondingly, he can only hope to legitimate a
restricted range of actions. It follows that to study the principles which
the agent finally chooses to profess must be to study one of the key determinants of his decision to follow out any one particular line of action.
   Even if these conclusions seem acceptable, however, it may still be felt that
I have chosen to illustrate them with an unfortunate example. It has become
a commonplace amongst historians to repudiate any suggestion that the
principles of Protestant Christianity played a causal role in the development
of capitalist practices. As Trevor-Roper has put it, any such theory ‘is
exploded by the simple fact’ that ‘large scale industrial capitalism’ already
existed before the Protestant reformation.®! It is true that if Weber imagined
that a pre-existing Protestant ethic later helped in such a direct way to cause
the rise of capitalism, then his theory   is refuted b   showing   that the emergence of capitalism predated the rise of Protestantism, It is hard to believe,
however, that he intended only to suggest such a crude and easily discredited
eRe
connection. It seems more plausible to construe hi          aving intended to
argue that the Protestant ethic was particularly well adjusted to legitimatin
the rise of capitalism, and in this way helped it to develop and flourish. My
own argument can thus be read as an attempt to reinterpret what I take to
have been Weber’s real meaning. I do not wish, however, to press this point
of interpretation here. I only wish to emphasize that even if Trevor-Roper’s
criticism can be shown to point to a real weakness in Weber’s argument, it
cannot be shown to point to any weakness in the argument I have myself
been concerned to advance. My suggestion that the role of Protestantism
was to legitimate the rise of capitalism is obviously based not on ignorin
but_on_ assuming the fact that capitalism predated Protestantism. What I

=== p. 118 ===

      rks                            Quentin Skinner                                       |

      ave tried to Show, however, is that it does not follow from this fact, as
      TrevorRoper and others appear to conclude, that Protestantism had no
      causal role to play i the development of capitalism.As I have sought to
      argue, this ignores the fact that the earliest capitalists lacked any legitimacy
      ww the moral climate  tn which they at first found themselv             es,
                                                                         and so needed

              eS the ROFMative Vocabulary of the                             greatly to.
            NETO, wethas case, of all sincerely rehigt
poe                     Yb Seed                      ck.   But there isno doubtthatthe
RSS                                ry of Protestantism not only                :
                                         t      arguably     to   ch:    its dev
      BRENT WS                       icular
                   She WAYS — im partic         towards an ethic of industriousness.

      at Bs _Neology,      even if                  :           never provided the
      camtahsts with any of their real motives, it is still essential to refer to the ~._
      Wology im onder to be able toexplain how and why the system developed.

