=== chunk: tully-1988-meaning-and-context/ch7-hollis-say-it-with-flowers ===
title: Say it with flowers
source_pdf: docs/sources/tully-1988-meaning-and-context/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 149-160
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 135
plan_page_end: 146
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 135 ===

                                        if
                     Say it with flowers
                            Martin Hollis

 The historian has only the husks of action, the traces of what once
 were episodes played out between past and future. To recover these
 passing moments he relies on texts of all sorts, on utterances in ink and
 stone, metal and ash, which once had meaning for his blank skeletons.
 Even written, reflective texts are not as if the tape-recorded voices of
 actors prevented by death from uttering them in person, since they were
 addressed to other audiences, couched in other idioms and fired by other
 concerns. The historian must read in before he can read out and there is a
 plain danger of his finding what he put there himself. Even written texts are
 not just strings of propositions. In uttering them, their authors were acting
and interacting and the historian must interpret the actions as well as the
words. Here lie circles of the most daunting kind but Quentin Skinner has
 braved them before and I seize the chance to dissect them with him.! It goes
without saying that what so visibly troubles him in the dark of the archives
also afflicts anyone trying to understand the social meaning of action.
    To broach a huge topic, I shall assume that historical actors have at
least some_autonomy within a context which both enables and constrains
them; that their actions are their solutions to problems set by circumstance
and other actors; and that their skill is crucial in interpreting their actions.
Ideally I should like to defend this picture but, since Mr       Skinner shares it
and space is short, I shall concentrate on the puzzles it poses. The first
part of the paper will fill it in for action by individuals, which can readily
be seen as manoeuvre within a context but not without encountering some
wicked circles. The second part will try to extend the idea to the combined
action of persons in groups, where the context is no longer wholly external
to the actors. Here some snags in the logic of collective action are added to
the previous circles and I shall hand the resulting knots over to Mr Skinner

=== p. 136 ===

with relief. The clue to these puzzles of meaning and explanation is to be the
notion of rationality but I cannot pretend that it is an easy clue to read.
                                                             ~

‘Say it with flowers’, the florists urge. Very well, let us do so in a story
intended to sketch an approach to historical interpretation which Skinner
will recognize as his own, to exhibit the circles which arise and finally to
usher in the one disagreement between us. Let us suppose that, soon after
the balcony scene of some real-life Romeo and Juliet, Romeo sends Juliet a
bunch of red orchids with a card inscribed, ‘A beauteous flower for when
next we meet.’ This episode is the text and J shall be using ‘text’ to refer
not just to speech but to any act whose author intends others to understand
something by it. What is its interpretation? The question is ambiguous
between meaning and explanation and I introduce the elements of our discussion by splitting it into four. First, there is the overt meaning — in the case
of speech ‘What did he succeed in saying?’ Second, there is the covert meaning — ‘What did he intend to say and intend in saying it?’ Third, there is the
overt explanation — ‘Why was the utterance apt?’ Fourth, there is the covert
explanation — ‘What was his motive in uttering the text?’ The historian’s
primary task, according to Skinner, is to answer the first three parts of the
question but not the fourth. Having extolled the subtlety of this approach,
I shall nevertheless insist that the question of motive be answered too.
   The division into overt and covert has to do with the importance of context. It is not as if the sending of the flowers means just whatever Romeo
means by it. ‘In “action” is included all human behaviour’, says Weber, ‘in
so far as the acting individual attaches subjective meaning to it.’ The dictum
is not to be read as saying that subjective meaning is all. Romeo cannot
succeed in meaning what he pleases by the flowers. The gesture is taken
from stock, its meaning restricted to a conventional list. It may be a mark
of love, respect, gratitude or sympathy, perhaps, but not of hate, scorn or
support for the Verona football team. (I ignore hidden codes or conventions,
like irony, which exploit conventions.) This is just as well, since utterances
constituted wholly by subjective meanings would be quite beyond the historian’s reach. So let us suppose the episode to be one in courtship, expressing
something conventionally said by lovers. What exactly is said is then determined by the message on the little white card, provided that it is within the
list of proper meanings. (If the card reads ‘The cat sat on the mat’, Romeo
succeeds in meaning nothing by the flowers.) A sort of social grammar is

=== p. 137 ===

at work.
  Here, then, is one notion of context, where the actors engage           from
socially recognized positions, attended with normative expectations. We
may call it the normative context, the set of rules governing what a
man must, may and shall not do in each social capacity. The rules
both constitute and regulate. Romeo is not Juliet’s lover at all, unless
he stays within the rules of courtship; he is a sorry lover, unless he
courts her with grace, unselfishness and fervour. Admittedly, the notion
of a norm is an elusive one, witness my swift transition from ‘position’
to ‘capacity’, and requires a tricky distinction between what is publicly
and tacitly permitted. But the idea that social action is constituted
and regulated by rules for what is legitimate is clear enough to accept.
   It has been held that the normative context exhausts both meaning
and explanation. Although Romeo has more than one option as a
lover, he also has other social positions and capacities, which together
determine a uniquely legitimate course of action. This approach is known
to sociologists as normative structuralism and its claim depends on seeing
norms as the social category of the last resort and on absorbing the actor
into them. By refusing the first move, on the ground that norms have further
social determinants, we get a notion of structural context; by refusing the
second, on the ground that actors also express inner states, in a way governed by rules which are not normative, we get one of expressive context.
   In speaking of structural context, | am thinking of structure in a
manner typified by Marx’s distinction of structure and superstructure. But
I shall leave the topic unexplored, since, even if there is an all-encompassing
structure, the normative context is still intermediately important enough
to keep us busy. In the same cavalier way, I shall ignore other external
factors of, for instance, geography, biology and even technology, presuming them to enter the interpretation of social action only through
the normative context and the actors’ consciousness. These are pieces of
ontological impudence which lack of space demands.
   The expressive context, however, is as crucial as the normative. Romeo’s
flowers are not just a lover’s insignia, like the wig on a judge. They are red
for passion, expressing fire within. This is a symbol, not a natural sign, and
belongs to a language of the heart. Romeo’s gesture in its normative context
is that of a suitor; in its expressive context it is that of a man in love. The
expression of feeling is governed by rules too and, in doing what is normatively proper, Romeo also conveys a claim to inner sentiment. That the claim
can be false shows that there is an external and enabling context for it.
   By citing the normative and expressive contexts, the historian gives the
overt meaning of the text. But, if that is what the flowers mean, it does
not exhaust what Romeo       means   by the flowers. Or so it will seem      to
anyone who denies that actors are mere vehicles of norms and sentiments.

=== p. 138 ===

Romeo also intends his gesture to be read in particular ways and intends
to achieve something by it. In part, no doubt, he means what the flowers
mean, uttering their overt message with the intention that others recognize
this intention. But, anticipating Henry James, he can be addressing several
messages to several audiences with the one text. Conscious perhaps of
Lady Capulet’s intercepting eye, he intends the formality and the plush
orchids to bespeak an admirer of solid substance but slight acquaintance
— an intention likelier to succeed if it goes unnoticed. At the same
time he intends Juliet to catch the echo of her own words on the balcony:

           This bud of love by summer’s ripening breath
           May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.

He intends her to relish the incongruity of these intentions. He means,
in a common    sense of that nimble term, whatever he intends others to
understand. That is the covert meaning of the text.
   The overt explanation is got by parading the overtly legitimate elements
of the covert meaning and showing why the actor was justified in context
in acting as he did. Much is forgiven a man in love and much can
therefore be achieved by laying successful claim to the title. Exactly what
needs doing to regain the sense of an action in the eyes of contemporaries
for the benefit of posterity will depend on the particular case. In Skinner’s
hands the idea that texts are to be interpreted by recovering the context,
the actors’ intentions and their legitimating reasons becomes a sharp tool,
as the articles cited at the start bear witness. What does not depend on
particular cases, however, is his contention that the historian should not
tackle, still less prejudge, questions of motive. Hence the overt explanation
stops strictly with what is legitimate. We are not meant to infer that it tells
us by what the actor was really moved. For the principles and sentiments
which a man professes in action are the key to explaining his actions in
context, whether or not he expresses them sincerely. The crucial point
is that an actor cannot succeed in his actions without legitimating
them.
   So when, fourthly, we ask whether Romeo’s intentions were honourable,
the answer is that we neither know nor need to know. He is sighing like a
furnace, his orchids are aflame, he is every inch a man on fire; yet it may
all be sound and fury, signifying nothing. Actors are neither mere creatures
of norms nor mere vehicles of sentiments. They are being conceived at
a distance not only from what their actions mean but also from what
they mean their actions to mean. Once the historian has found them
sufficient reason to have acted as he did, the historian can penetrate
no further but he has done enough. To sum up schematically, Romeo
illustrates this picture:

=== p. 139 ===

                                             rules       intentions

                                             reasons     motives

   The four boxes correspond to the opening four questions and, in strong,
ingenious support of Collingwood’s dictum that all history is the history of
ideas, Skinner offers to do history with the first three only.
   We are now ready for the circles which beset any hermeneutic account
of understanding. They arise because rules, reasons, intentions and indeed
motives are inter-related both ontologically and epistemologically. Ontologically, the rules of courtship are those binding lovers in the expression
of love; lovers are persons subject to the rules because they are in love;
love is the sentiment expressed by observing the rules of courtship.
Are these relations constitutive? The case for saying so is that love
is surely not a universal condition which people catch like colds in
all climes and contexts and then express in what happens to be the
local idiom;   that, even   if courtship   rules from   many      cultures   are all
so classified because they govern expression of the same sentiments, the
sentiments are the same because their expression is governed by courtship
rules; that in general the covert is a discrimination of the overt, no less
than the overt is an expression of the covert. But I merely mention
this daunting issue, since there is an epistemological circle in any case.
   Epistemologically, to be warranted in ascribing an intention to express
love, the historian must know that the relevant rules are those of courtship
and that the actors are lovers; and hence must already be warranted in
ascribing the intention. He understands the overt as the context of the
covert and the covert as what the actors mean by the overt. Nor can
he take the problem as an empirical one, to be overcome by tacking
back and forth from overt to covert in advancing zig-zags, since apparent
success will not guard him against a charge of imputing what he purports
to discover. The problem is a theoretical one of conceiving the relation
between rules, actors and intentions in such a way that the merit of
rival interpretations can be judged. Even if he knows it is soluble,
on the ground that the actors succeed in interacting with each other,
the exact solution makes a difference and he does not yet have one.
   The way in, Skinner and I agree, is to make the actors as rational as
possible. But here we part company. In his version to deem a man rational
is to say that he knows how to legitimate and so achieve his intentions.
The idea is to treat meaningful action as a text which, construed with an
apparatus of locutions, illocutions and perlocutions and on the assumption
that it was rationally uttered, is its own explanation. The attraction is that

=== p. 140 ===

the historian can spin his yarn, knit the actor a cap and, if a critic
doubts whether the actor was actually wearing the cap, retort that we
need not ask. A rational actor, in recognizing good reasons for acting,
makes those reasons his own. Motives are not needed where the actor
in his context would have acted in the same way from more than one
motive. For instance Romeo would have sent the flowers, whether he was
sincerely in love or merely bent on an alliance with the house of Capulet;
so we want a form of explanation which leaves the matter of motive open.
   I claim to detect two non sequiturs and a lacuna. First, if the actor emerges
with more than one possible motive, it does not follow that the matter of
motive is left open. If the actor is rational, then motives which would have
led him to act differently are thereby ruled out and so the matter of motive is
only partly open. Second, just because two possible motives would yield the
same action in the context, it does not follow that explanation can proceed
without deciding between them. To know a man acted as he did involves
knowing how he would have acted in other conditions, for instance those
where the two motives would move him along differing paths. It involves
knowing too when a man wanted but failed to achieve, as opposed to when
he seemed to want but covertly was not really trying. So it looks as if motive
does matter — a suspicion confirmed by noticing that the actor has as yet
no reason for action at all. He has legitimating, overt reasons but his being
rational depends on his having a covert reason for taking advantage of them.
His intention cannot be this reason, nor can his expressions of principle and
sentiment, while all are being conceived as tactical devices. There is thus a
lacuna when we ask why he wants what he is overtly pursuing and it must
be filled, if his tactics are to be interpreted as those of a rational man.
   Motives do matter then but, in the face of the hermeneutic circles, they
must be the sort of item which can move a rational man. The heart has its
reasons; yet not such as reason knows nothing of. Mere wants will not do.
Someone may complain that whether there is a reason for Romeo to send
flowers is one thing and whether Romeo himself has a reason another, the
difference depending on whether he has a motivating desire. I reply that having a desire to do something does not in itself make it rational to do it, even
when no other stronger desire would thereby be frustrated. The rational man
not only has good reasons for his actions, given his desires and projects, but
also has good reasons for his desires and projects. What makes the difference
between there being good reason for him to act and his having good reason
to act is recognizing the good reason, which he thereby makes his own. The
point needs proper argument but it is enough for the moment that a vicious
circle occurs without it. If we are to discover Romeo’s motive by asking what
desires he must have had for his action to be rational, we cannot then hold
that whether his action was rational depends on the desires he happened to
have. An action which is the incompetent effecting of one want is wrongly

=== p. 141 ===

interpreted as the competent effecting of another. Hence we can find
the rational man’s motive only on the assumption that it is a rational one.
    There is now no case for assuming that all action is always equally
rational. Indeed there never was in the eyes of anyone who finds subjective
logic-of-the-situation explanations vacuous. But the rationality postulate
still stands, now revealed as an ideal-type assumption and a yardstick
for assessing what needs to be explained. Fully and objectively rational
action is explained by showing how it matches the ideal case; imperfectly
rational action needs a further account of why it fell short. Either way, the
historian starts by trying an intellectual interpretation and, even where only
partial explanation results, he will have determined what is missing. This
is what is involved in making the actors out to be as rational as possible.
  As soon as we insist on rational desire for rational actions, we embark
on a theory of real interests, eudaimonia or some such unnerving concept.
But there is no turning back and, if Skinner jibs at the notorious problems
thus set, I shall retort that he is already covertly relying on one himself.
Indeed I have always hoped that I find his writings rational because |
know that he writes as a rational man who rationally desires to find
the truth. Not pretending that the notorious problems are illusory,
however, I look to him to help their discussion forward.
   So far, then, we have a slightly revised scheme for interpreting individual
action:

            what?          action’s meaning      actor’s meaning
            why?           legitimating reasons | actor’s good reasons

The emended version retains the idea that legitimating reasons are crucial,
whatever the actor’s true motive, and still tries to elicit what is covert by
treating the actor as an objectively rational man. It differs only by insisting
on motive after all, but in the face of the hermeneutic circles, recasts motives
as reasons, in so far as the actor has good reasons for his desires. The
proviso leaves a large issue unresolved, however, as will be seen presently.

                                        I

Any success with Romeo can be generalized to small groups confronted
with a given context and either wholly of one mind or wholly under
the command of one member. But these are tight conditions and do
not apply even to an individual actor with any power over the context.
Since the power exists not only for wielders of law or force but wherever

=== p. 142 ===

norms are fluid or ambiguous, and since historians are crucially interested
in groups, movements and classes in transition and imperfect unity,
Romeo cannot be pressed straight into further service> To see why not,
let us first try treating group action as the combined action of individuals.
   The usual shape of this idea is that groups form and act through,
or as if through, a bargain among the members. Then, in parallel with
the unemended scheme before, it seems at first not to matter just what
motive each member has for joining in, provided that each gets more
from belonging than membership costs. To be rational, group action need
not succeed, since there will be opposing groups and other constraints, nor
need it best further the collective aim of the group, since this aim ascribes
a notional identity to the group which the analysis denies to be real; but it
must offer the members individually the largest likely return on their costs,
either directly or with a promise of a later quid pro quo. In assuming rationality, the historian sets out to apply such an analysis as far as it will go.
   The sharper the edge of the conceptual tool, the smaller its scope.
Sharpness comes from keeping strictly to cost-benefit terms; scope exists
only where the benefit could not have been gained at lower costs.
Hence, to borrow a famous line of argument, the tool works only
where benefits are confined to those who pay and are proportional to
how much is paid. Otherwise it is always more rational to let others
take the burden. The history of the British trades union movement, for
instance, cannot be explained in this way. Members, especially leaders,
bore all the risks and hardship, while benefits went to workers as a whole.
Since no single worker could significantly affect the outcome, each had a
choice between benefit with cost and benefit without cost. Admittedly,
had everyone acted rationally, there would have been no benefits for
anyone; but it is still true that costs-plus-no-benefits is a worse choice
than no-costs-plus-no-benefits. Admittedly too, early unions were often
Friendly Societies, thereby offering some benefits to members only; but the
story would still have been very different without the brave thousands who
acted irrationally in cost-benefit terms. The logic of collective action seems
to show that individuals are rarely rational in their collective bargains.
   A likely retort is that the fault lies not in deeming men rational
but in dubbing them egoists; that the paradox arises only if self-seeking
is the sole rational motive. Trades union history is intelligible enough,
granted that the pioneers were altruists, who recognized the need to
combine to gain their altruistic ends.
   The retort is plausible and instructive. It shows that motive does matter,
if what is irrational from one motive is rational from another. But it does
so misleadingly, since egoism and altruism are not motives in the sense of
good reasons. Egoists and altruists, like everyone else, have specific reasons
for specific intentions, for instance demanding manhood suffrage as a way

=== p. 143 ===

of increasing the political power of unions. These specific reasons are not
fixed in advance. They emerge from debate and theorizing and take shape
only as the movement progresses. Yet the historian needs to know what
they are, since his knowledge of who would have done what in what
circumstances depends on them and since his claims to interpret depend, as
we saw with Romeo, on such counterfactuals. He is not dealing with a fixed
motive, like ‘altruism’, which spreads as the campaign gains adherents. An
altruist is someone with specific reasons for actions which are his reasons
because the actions will benefit others. That said, however, it does seem
plausible to reject the universal egoism often assumed by economic
theories of collective action. Yet it is not thereby shown more rational
to be an altruist than an egoist and a step in the argument is still missing.
   Putting the point aside for later, we must next insist on a fundamental
difference between individuals and groups. While Romeo and Juliet act
singly, the likely response of each is an external factor in the planning
of the other. When they join forces, they acquire a joint power to decide
what both will do. Since what was external to each becomes internal
to both collectively but not to either, the power of joint decision is
an emergent property. Since it can include deciding the rules of their
relationship, context is no longer the external, fixed frame which it has
been hitherto. With larger groups in permanent and more embracing
alliance, there starts to be a control not only over relations within
the group but also over some of the external norms which enabled
and constrained its growth. Rational manipulation of context emerges
as a possibility and much of what was explicans becomes explicandum.
   If we want to take the idea of emergence seriously yet also to retain
the scheme of meanings and reasons, we might try regarding the group
as if it were a single actor. The most promising line is perhaps a Marxist
one, with the crucial units as classes, the overt being analysed through a
theory of ideology and the covert a matter of praxis and class interests.
I shall not discuss the merits of the line here, however, since it involves
rejecting the analogy between single actor and unitary group. There is no
sufficiently analogous process of deliberation and decision. If the actor’s
real reasons are those he would give to himself correctly and in secret,
the group’s are not those it would agree on in private session. The private
session, although similarly closed to outsiders and although determining
the public stance of all the members, remains an internally public session
of individual members. Debate about what the group should do reflects
not only uncertainty about strategy and tactics but also uncertainty about
manoeuvre within an alliance of actors with conflicting covert motives. So
the puzzle of recovering Romeo’s reasons is translated not into that of
laying hands on the private-circulation-only minutes of the meeting but
into that of recovering the various reasons of the several members present.

=== p. 144 ===

  The impasse stands. To interpret the overt utterances and actions
of a group, we need access to real reasons. If the real reasons are
those of individual actors and if we conceive the actors as pre-social
atoms,   real reasons   are irrecoverable.   If the real reasons   are those of
the emergent group and if we conceive the actors as deriving their human
identity from membership of groups, we lose the thematic analogy between
individuals and groups. So we still need a way to conceive actors so that,
provided they are rational, it is possible for us to discern the reasons
for which they act. And we still need to show how groups of actors
can be judged rational or irrational in their manipulation of context.
   Someone will protest that there is an impasse only because I have insisted
that rational action has objectively good reasons; whereas perceived reasons
will surely suffice. But, however great the difficulties, I remain unrepentant.
How a man perceives his situation is presumably meant to be a variable the
value of which is to be settled empirically. To settle the value we must know
how rational the man is. How rational he is is either given vacuously by
the proposition that everyone always does what seems to him a good idea
at the time or depends in part on how accurately he perceives his situation.
To cut into this circle, we must treat rationality as a skill in judgement
which can be ascribed a priori in some measure to anyone capable of
communicating with others. If the actors are not basically rational, it is
impossible to know how accurate or inaccurate their perceptions are. In
a longer script | would try to say what the basic measure must include
but I hope the point can be made in principle without going into detail.
   How then are the actors to be conceived? If their identity is not to be
derived from that of definitive groups, we must still try to show how what
is collectively rational is so because it is rational for those taking part. Since
the puzzles arise when the actors are conceived as egoists, the solution is
to break the earlier tie between egoism and rationality. Yet other motives
cannot just be tacked on to rational-man models. It does not make the self-sacrifice of Victorian trades unionists rational merely to point out that they
were moved by moral commitment. Nor is self-sacrifice made rational by
invoking, as a selective incentive, the calm of a clear conscience which comes
from a sense of commitment discharged. Once we have insisted that rational
action needs objectively good reasons, we must show how commitment can
be rational. The question then becomes what it is about human beings
(or some at least) which makes it rational for them to act uneconomically.
   The objection to egoism is not that it predicates the wrong motive
of the right subject but that it wrongly abstracts the actor as a timeless
universal monad. So the corrective which will tempt a historian is to give
human nature more substance by having it vary with place and time. If
different cultures are peopled by different sorts of men and women, it
is a historian’s job to know what sort he is dealing with. The point of

=== p. 145 ===

assuming rationality is then to let him discover by asking what kind of
man would find it rational to act as he did. To a charge of relativism
he replies that he still has an objective criterion of rationality to determine
what it would be rational for a specific sort of man to want and to try to
achieve in a specific context. But now the assumption of rationality helps
him only if it is rational for the sort of actor a culture creates to accept
the aims and ethos it prescribes. Hence he can account for contextual
change only as the adjusting of a discrepancy between prescribed aims
and permitted means. And he is still confined to meanings and legitimating
reasons, with the circular results discussed earlier.
   It seems to me, then, that actors must be conceived in a timeless,
universal way, so that historical explanation is given enough a priori to
avoid the circles. The fault in attributing egoism to these actors is that to
do so is to think of them as monads. The alternative, I suggest, is that
they create their human identity through using social capacities in social
relations. They succeed not by achieving any old equipoise between desires
and norms but by creating a rational identity, one which expresses what it
is rational to value. It has to be rational to be virtuous, and virtuous to act as
a person bound to others. Here the argument crosses the border into ethics
and | cannot pursue it. But I do urge that combined action is rational only
when it helps each participant to live as he should and that the historian
who judges the rationality of contextual change is also judging its worth.

Having flaunted my colours, I shall end more soberly with some summarizing questions to Mr Skinner. His admirable method works well with
Romeo and other single actors, especially when they happen to be authors
of written texts. I object solely that the historian needs their motives or,
rather, since what is needed must be recoverable, their real reasons. But
the method seems at first no help in interpreting combined action. This
can hardly be because action in concert is never rational for those taking
part and the problem is to find a logic for collective action. When and why
is it rational for individuals to incur the costs of banding together? When
and why is it rational for groups to try to change the norms internal and
external to them? These are the ontological questions — the former being
acute for Skinner, if he still wishes to be silent about motive, and the
latter, if social meaning and explanation always require a given context.
   Epistemologically, the daunting circles can be broken only by assuming
that actors are rational enough for even their irrational acts to be intelligible.
But it needs to be more than a platitude that the social world makes sense
when interpreted and the assumption must have an edge. The edge comes
from an objective, not a subjective, notion of rationality, which involves
the historian in judging how well the actors did. Rational action is a skill.
At what? Is it just the effective translation of consistent preferences into

=== p. 146 ===

the most promising course of action? I have claimed that the rationality of
motives is needed in judging that the actors’ real reasons were good reasons.
Yet the puzzle set by ascribing a universal egoism to pre-social individuals
is not removed by tacking other, more benevolent motives on to the same
model of man. A fresh way of conceiving the actors is required. Since a
vicious relativism results if human nature is made to vary empirically with
historical context, I hold out for something universal. Here metaphysics
and ethics run together and I expect that the mixture will be too much
for Mr Skinner’s historian to stomach. Yet, if rational action is its own
explanation, every historical explanation judges and partly endorses. Where,
I ask finally, do Mr Skinner’s endorsements stop short of moral approval?
   ‘Wherefore art thou Romeo?’, Juliet exclaimed. If the rational actor
aims at what it is rational to become in an historical setting, she has
posed the hardest question.

