=== chunk: tully-1988-meaning-and-context/ch9-femia-historicist-critique ===
title: An historicist critique of revisionist methods
source_pdf: docs/sources/tully-1988-meaning-and-context/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 170-189
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 156
plan_page_end: 175
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 156 ===

                                    9                   ~

An historicist critique of ‘revisionist’
  methods for studying the history
               of ideas
                      Joseph V. Femia

  Man, bound and determined by the reality of life, is set free not
  only through art — as has often been set forth — but also through
  the understanding of history.
                                                                 Dilthey
  We must use the criterion that a philosophical position should be
  criticized and evaluated not for what it pretends to be, but for what
  itreallyiisey
                                                                 Gramsci

                                     I

What are the correct procedures to adopt in the attempt to arrive at an
understanding of a past work of philosophy or political thought? In the
past decade or so traditional approaches to the history of ideas have been
subjected to severe and fundamental criticism by a handful of scholars
who, while not agreeing on all particulars, generally laud one another’s
work, depict themselves as methodological innovators, and constitute what
we might loosely call a ‘revisionist school’ within the field of intellectual
history. The nucleus of this school — Quentin Skinner, J. G. A. Pocock and
John Dunn — all complain about the lack of historicity in the treatment of
linguistic artefacts from the past. Their béte noire is the prevalent notion
that the whole point of studying ‘great’ works of philosophy is to extract
the ‘timeless elements’ or ‘dateless ideas’ with universal (and therefore

=== p. 157 ===

                 Historicist critique of ‘revisionist’ methods               U7,
contemporary) application. In striving to appropriate the ‘classical texts’ to
the present, the orthodox historians of ideas, it is contended, have generated
both mistaken empirical claims and conceptual confusion; they have ignored
the uniquely historical question of what the various thinkers intended to say,
and have, instead, deployed interpretative techniques which are not properly
historical. As an alternative, say the revisionists, it is necessary to develop
‘a truly autonomous method, one which offers a means of treating the
phenomena of political thought strictly as historical phenomena and — since
history is about things happening — even as historical events: as things happening in a context which defines the kind of events they were’.! In essence
the alternative urges a theory of interpretation which stresses the recovery
of an author’s intention to mean a particular thing in writing what he wrote
at a particular time. The ‘intentional’ approach, it is said, offers the best
hope of restoring the study of past thought to a sound historical footing.
   In what follows, I shall challenge some basic assumptions of this recent
critique and methodology. The revisionists have, of course, been attacked
before, but not from the perspective I adopt — the ‘absolute historicism’2
expounded by Antonio Gramsci. Rejection of the conventional ‘timeless
approach’, I shall argue, by no means commits us to the arbitrary brand
of historicism espoused by the revisionists. For reasons of economy and
convenience, my criticism will concentrate on Skinner’s famous article,
‘Meaning    and understanding     in the history of ideas’ (2), the classic of
the genre which established its author as the foremost representative of the
methodological point of view I am concerned to assess. It has not escaped
my notice that Skinner has, in subsequent papers, sought to refine and
develop his position, but, since he has never repudiated the basic points
made in the 1969 article,‘ it is perfectly fair to use this as our focal point.
Anyhow, it is not my aim to trace the development of Skinner’s thought
but to examine the work which most forcefully articulates a specific
(and, in my view, grotesquely mistaken) approach to the history of ideas.
   As will be seen, Skinner (and others like him) advance the following
propositions: (1) In the sphere of political/social reality, there are no universal truths or perennial questions; all systems of ideas correspond to specific
phases and orders of experience. (2) Past thought must be completely dissolved into its precise context (culture, situation, and so forth); it possesses
no capacity for independent life. (3) The intellectual historian should not
concern himself with the validity or present significance of past ideas; texts
must not be regarded as vehicles for the exercise of the analyst’s own
preoccupations. (4) Historicity demands that we focus on what an author
consciously intended to say. And (5), no subsequent account of a thinker’s
enterprise could survive the demonstration that it is itself dependent upon
the use of anachronistic criteria of description and classification — criteria
which, in other terms, would have been unintelligible to the thinker himself.

=== p. 158 ===

     Historicism, I hope to show, only commits us’ to proposition (1) (and that
     only in modified form). Skinner apparently believes that propositions (2) —
     (5) follow logically from proposition (1), but he is wrong. Indeed, propositions (2) — (5), if taken seriously, would reduce the history of thought to little
     more than a sterile celebration of intellectual pedigree. Following Gramsci,
     I argue that: (a) ideas may enshrine much that is of permanent value, even
     though they are themselves untrue or obsolete; (b) thinkers do indeed work
     within intellectual traditions, which — to some extent — transcend particular
     contexts; (c) all history is ‘contemporary history’, dictated by the interests
     of the historian; study of the past is valuable only in so far as it throws
     light on present problems or needs; and (d) it is neither necessary nor
     desirable, from an historicist perspective, to understand a body of thought
     purely or even primarily in terms of the author’s conscious designs.

                                             I
     Let us now take a closer look at the new ‘intentional’ approach. The
     revisionists’ debt to the historicist tradition has never received the attention
     it deserves. While historicism traces its origins back to Vico’s seminal, but
     indigestible and long-ignored writings, it was only in the nineteenth century
     that we witnessed the triumphant emergence of history as a distinct manner
     of understanding and explaining events. The historicist outlook, though
     hardly uniform, characteristically comprises four logically interconnected
     features: (1) Men transform themselves by their.own efforts to understand
     the world and adapt it to their needs, both physical and spiritual; there is,
     then, no fixed, unchanging human nature, common to all men everywhere
     at all times, no static psychological structure from which universal goals

oA
     and principles can be logically deduced. (2) Truth and goodness are not
     universal and immutable Platonic forms existing in some super-sensible,
     timeless heaven; consequently, there are no absolute standards in terms
     of which things and persons can finally be evaluated; ‘the historical
     consciousness lives in the comprehension of all ages’, writes Dilthey,
     ‘and it observes in all creativity of individuals, the accompanying relativity
     and transience’.5 (3) All ideas and values are products of a given historical
     epoch, of a specific civilization, or even of definite national collectivity;
     every philosopher is a child of his time; he uses the symbols or language
     at his disposal and deals with the problems unique to his age. (4) Forms
     of human experience, including works of art or philosophy, must be
     understood and assessed not in terms of eternal principles, valid for all men
     in all circumstances, but (essentially) in relation to the scales of values and
     rules of thought appropriate to their own specific time and environment;
     human achievements must always be interpreted with reference to the particular network of practices and institutions in which they are embedded.¢

=== p. 159 ===

  While Skinner scarcely acknowledges his debt to the historicist tradition,
his affinity with it (or with an extreme variant of it) clearly underlines his
methodology (2:64):
   [I]t has I think become clear that any attempt to justify the study
   of [the history of ideas] in terms of the ‘perennial problems’ and
   ‘universal truths’ to be learned from the classic texts must amount
   to the purchase of justification at the expense of making the subject
   itself foolishly and needlessly naive.
‘Great’ texts, he believes, do not highlight any universal political predicament; they are not to be viewed as perennially important attempts to set
down universal propositions about political or social reality (2:64 — 5).
   Any statement ... is inescapably the embodiment of a particular
   intention, on a particular occasion, addressed to the solution of a
   particular problem, and thus specific to its situation in a way that
   it can only be naive to try to transcend ... there simply are no
   perennial problems in philosophy: there are only individual answers
   to individual questions, with as many different answers as there are
   questions, and as many different questions as there are questioners.
Since the authors of the ‘classics’ were not discussing eternal questions
in an eternal language, but writing in a particular situation, addressing
their arguments for particular purposes to a particular audience, it must
be mistaken to read them as though they were speaking to our present
concerns — in even the most oblique manner.
   Having dismissed the possibility that past ideas can survive translation
into the language of disparate cultures, long after their own worlds have
passed away, Skinner can treat the ideas of our ancestors as purely
historical phenomena, forever locked into their determinate contexts. Does
this amount to the sort of determinism which seeks to reduce linguistic acts
to an underlying, more ‘real’ world of production or social reality? Not
at all. The revisionists, especially Skinner, are infatuated by what Husserl
called the ‘intentionality of experience’. The ‘essential aim’ in any attempt
to understand past texts, must be to ascertain the ‘complex intention on the
part of the author’ (2:63). As Dunn puts it: “The problem of interpretation
is always the problem of closing the context. What closes the context
in actuality is the intention (and, much more broadly, the experiences)
of the speaker.’? Priority is very much accorded to what the writer in
question consciously wished to communicate to his listeners or readers.
Herein lies the key to discovering the actual historical meaning of a text.®
Once again, the similarity to (at least certain strands of) historicist thought
is striking. Dilthey, for example, maintained that historical understanding
must be firmly based in a reconstruction of the subjective experience of

=== p. 160 ===

historical actors. Human beings — unlike stones and trees — reflect on
what they do; they interpret the situations they are in, set themselves
deliberate goals and plans for the future. On this view, any study of
man’s behaviour which ignores intentionality and purposiveness thereby
leaves out of account the most important features of the human condition.
   How, then, do we go about recovering the intentions of past thinkers?
How can we decode what they meant to convey? What are the criteria
for evaluating alternative interpretations? As the quotation frorm Dunn
indicates, it is necessary to examine the context in which a writer
formulated his thought, in order to specify the range of meanings which
his words could have had for him. For Skinner, the relevant context is the
prevailing set of linguistic conventions, the stock of concepts and symbols
available to a writer and his audience. This linguistic context should be
‘treated as an ultimate framework for helping to decide what conventionally
recognizable meanings, in a society of that kind, it might in principle have
been possible for someone to have intended to communicate’ (2:64). In
urging us to immerse ourselves in the historical context (however defined),
the revisionists express their distaste for the textualist orthodoxy, insisting
as it does ‘on the autonomy of the text itself as the sole necessary key to
its own meaning’ (2:29, 51). In demanding that the historical meaning of a
statement be identified with (or reduced to) the intention of the writer in
uttering the statement, they also join issue with the so-called ‘contextual
methodology’   (2:59), which    holds   that ‘it is the context   “of religious,
political, and economic factors” which determines the meaning of any given
text? (2:29). The core assumption of this approach, ‘that the ideas of a
given text should be understood in terms ofits social context’, is — according
to Skinner — fundamentally erroneous. Knowledge of the antecedent causal
conditions of an action is not equivalent to understanding the action, for
such understanding presupposes ‘a grasp of the point of the action for the
agent who performed it’ (2:59). For Skinner, ‘real understanding’ of
any statement is tantamount to uncovering its ‘intended illocutionary force’
(2:61). Indeed, any characterization of past utterances that goes beyond
subjective intentions is, to use his word, ‘meaningless’. If historical studies
are not to be studies of what genuine historical agents did think ‘then they
might as well be turned into fiction by intention, for they must certainly be
fiction by attainment’. It cannot be a correct appraisal of any agent’s action
to say that he did (or failed to do) something ‘unless it is first clear that he
did have, and even could have had, the intention to try to perform that
action’ (2:48). For example, we cannot, a la Macpherson,’ describe Locke
as a defender of unlimited capital accumulation unless we can establish that
this is actually how he viewed himself when enunciating certain propositions
at particular points in his work.!° With its presumption that philosophical
systems can be understood primarily in terms of underlying economic forces

=== p. 161 ===

or constraints rather than conscious designs, Marxist discourse particularly
offends Skinner’s sensibilities. But Marxism is only the most obvious villain.
Any form of historical interpretation predicated on a distinction between the
‘manifest’ and ‘latent’ content of a body of thought is dismissed as ‘fiction’.
No thinker can be said to have meant or done something which he himself
would not accept as a correct description of what he had meant or done.
   Failure to reduce the meaning of a text to authorial intentions can only
breed what Skinner calls ‘historical absurdity’ (2:32, 35). This absurdity
is ultimately caused by the historian’s foolish habit of projecting his own
interests, views and preoccupations onto the author he is discussing. In so
doing, he employs a number of misguided strategies, inexorably producing
a succession of fantastic claims about what the thinker in question
was doing. What strategies, then, raise the ire of Skinner and _ his
friends?!! The list is extensive. Here I shall mention only those relevant
to my subsequent argument.
   First, there is the ‘mythology of coherence’ (2:38), the assumption
that it is the historian’s business ‘to furnish his author with a degree
of coherence he did not in fact achieve’.!2 If there is no coherent system
readily accessible to the exegete, his duty, by this ‘mythology’, is to find
one — even if this forces him to rummage through one work after another,
imposing a high degree of consistency on the whole corpus. Because of
this tendency, laments Dunn, ‘it is often extremely unclear whether the
history of ideas is the history of anything which ever did actually exist
in the past’. Instead, it becomes ‘a history of fictions — of rationalist
constructs out of the thought processes of individuals, not of plausible
abridgements of these thought processes’. !3
   Closely connected with the ‘mythology of coherence’ is the ‘mythology
of doctrines’, the main form of which consists of ‘converting scattered or
quite incidental remarks by a classic theorist into his “doctrine”’ on a theme
close to the heart of the analyst. This leads to ‘sheer anachronism’, whereby
a given writer is ‘discovered’ to have held a view, because of some chance
similarity of terminology, on a subject to which he either did not or could
not have meant to contribute. For example, on the basis of some typically
Aristotelian remarks concerning the executive role of a ruler compared
with the legislative role of a sovereign people, Marsilius of Padua is
often said to have possessed a ‘doctrine’ of the separation of powers,
even though the ideas and suggestions making up this doctrine were ‘first
canvassed some two centuries’ after his death. Marsilius himself ‘was not
even concerned with the issue of political freedom’ — which issue is central
to the ‘separation of powers’ thesis. It is improper, Skinner concludes, to
suppose that the Paduan ‘could have meant to contribute to a debate the
terms of which were unavailable to him, and the point of which would
have been lost on him’ (2:32 — 3). Even ‘more insidious’ is the danger

=== p. 162 ===

of ‘“reading in” a doctrine which a given writer might in principle have
meant to state, but in fact had no intention to convey’. An example here
is J. W. Gough’s inflation of Locke’s scattered remarks on trusteeship
into nothing less than Locke’s doctrine of ‘the political trust’(2:34).
   Skinner is also resolutely opposed to all attempts to praise or fault past
theorists on the basis of our own standards or interests.!+ As historians it is
our duty only to relate and explain, not to pronounce verdicts: the historian
is not a judge but a detective. Indeed, Skinner conveys the distinct impression
that all evaluative judgements of past works are ludicrous — regardless of
whether or not the ‘judge’ purports to be engaged in the activity of writing
history. Commentators, we are warned, must refrain from criticizing, say,
Plato’s Republic for omitting the influence of public opinion or Hobbes’
Leviathan for overlooking the social basis of political power or Locke’s
Second Treatise for failing to set out a clear position on universal suffrage.
These alleged ‘failures’ are illusory. Since ‘failing presupposes trying’, and
since neither Plato nor Hobbes nor Locke had any intention of dealing
with the subjects mentioned here, it is simply illogical to castigate them in
this way.!5 But this is not all. Neither should we, like Leo Strauss, presume
to condemn Machiavelli’s teaching as evil and irreligious, a disastrous
deviation from true ethical standards. Such a tone of moral disapproval
has no place in historical investigation (2:36). Conversely, it makes no
sense at all to praise past thinkers for either their moral insights or their
analytical innovations. It is therefore absurd, for example, to applaud
Montesquieu for sowing the seeds of the welfare state or Machiavelli for
destroying medieval illusions about the actual conduct of politics (2:35).
  Another (related) ‘absurdity’ which draws Skinner’s fire is the tendency to
point out earlier anticipations of later doctrines and to credit each writer in
terms of this ‘clairvoyance’. Thus, it is false to maintain, as does one observer, that ‘Locke’s theory of signs is notable “as an anticipation of Berkeley’s
metaphysics”’. Such statements are, in fact, literally ‘meaningless’ (not just
unhistorical) because ‘it can scarcely have been Locke’s intention to anticipate Berkeley’s metaphysics’ (2:35, 49). Unless Skinner is simply making
a pedantic point about the ‘misuse’ of the verb ‘to anticipate’, we must
assume that he is also against all transhistorical comparisons (for example,
comparing Locke and Berkeley on various metaphysical and epistemological
questions). Such purism would, in any case, seem to follow from his
notion that philosophical statements can in no way transcend their specific
contexts, as well as from his unrelenting focus on intentions. (Locke cannot
have intended his work to resemble Berkeley’s in X, Y and Z respects.)
   All these erroneous strategies and tendencies, in Skinner’s opinion,
ignore a fundamental consideration: namely, no ‘acceptable account of
an agent’s behaviour could ever survive the demonstration that it was
itself dependent on the use of criteria of description and classification

=== p. 163 ===

not available to the agent himself’ (2:48). There would be no temptation to
deviate from this criterion if it were realized that past texts are completely
without modern relevance: the ‘classic texts cannot be concerned with our
questions and answers, but only with their own’ (2:65). Interpreters are
driven to anachronism and absurdity by the hope that, through reflection on
the worth or significance of past ideas, they can arrive at a clearer
understanding of our present predicament. To Skinner, at least, this hope is
vain: ‘We must learn to do our thinking for ourselves’ (2:66). This, then, is
the basic assumption of his purification exercise.

                                       Ill

Earlier   I enumerated   five propositions   advanced    by Skinner,   four of
which, it was contended,     are not necessarily entailed by the historicist
perspective — which I| take to be essentially correct. Using Gramsci as
our point of departure, let us examine these propositions in turn.
   According to proposition (1), in the sphere of political/social reality,
there are no universal truths or perennial questions; all systems of
ideas correspond to specific phases and orders of experience. On this
point Gramsci was adamant:
   [I]t is necessary to deny the existence of ‘absolute philosophy’,
   abstract and speculative; that is, philosophy which ‘emerges’ out
   of preceding philosophy and inherits from it so-called ‘supreme
   problems’ ... Precedence passes to practice, to the real history
   of changes in social relations, from which ... emerge (or are
   presented) the problems that philosophy resolves and elaborates.'¢
Ideas do not fall from heaven — like all products of human activity, they are
formed in given circumstances through the action of definite needs. Conceptions of the world are responses ‘to specific problems posed by reality’.!7 As
such, ‘every “truth” believed to be eternal and absolute has had practical
origins and has represented a “provisional” value’.!8 Gramsci’s desire to
‘historicize’ or ‘relativize’ all philosophies or systems of thought (including
Marxism) was explicitly derived from Croce, one of his early mentors, who
rejected the notion of a static, transcendent conception of ultimate truth,
corresponding to an ideal model outside the human mind. Philosophies,
along with the problems they attempt to solve, are — to Croce — expressive
of nothing but the historical reality in which they are produced. Without the
historical conditions which call it forth, no set of ideas would be what it is:

   The Kantian philosophy was impossible at the time of Pericles, because
   it presupposes, for instance, exact natural science, which developed
   from the Renaissance onward. And this presupposes geographical

=== p. 164 ===

  discoveries, industry, capitalist or civil society, and so on. It presupposes the scepticism of David Hume, which‘in its turn presupposes the
  deism of the beginning of the eighteenth century, which in its turn is
  connected with the religious struggles in England andin all Europe in
  the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and so on. On the other hand,
  if Kant were to live again in our time, he could not write the Critique
  of Pure Reason without modifications so profound as to make
  of it, not only a new book, but an altogether new philosophy . . .!?

But does not the historicist approach go too far? Surely, some problems are
perennial, in the sense of always underlying thought about certain ranges
of concrete particulars, and such problems do tend to recur as explicit
focuses of concern. Acceptance of this point does not, I think, require
us to abandon the historicist framework — provided certain distinctions
are maintained. Vico himself conceded that we could abstract what is
common to various phases of culture — parallels and correspondences
of psychological and social structure common to individuals remote from
one another in space and time, race and outlook. Accordingly, he refers to
‘uniform ideas originating among entire peoples unknown to each other’,
ideas transcending ‘variations of detail’; to ‘the universal and eternal
principles ... on which all nations were founded and still preserve
themselves’; and to ‘the human necessities or utilities of social life’, upon
which the science of human affairs can be established.2° Exactly what Vico
means is not spelled out but reasonable inferences can be drawn. Men have
physical needs and sexual impulses, suffer from fear, are capable of using
symbols, must work together in groups to satisfy mutual needs, and so forth.
Human beings at all times become aware of needing such things as food,
shelter, security, language, sexual satisfaction, and human companionship.
Thus, any group of people living in a defined territory and interacting with
one another must devise social forms and cultural products to meet these
basic requirements. This is the permanent substratum of all philosophizing
and political thinking. It is this substratum, I submit, that accounts for the
recurrence of certain questions in the history of political thought; questions
such as who should rule, why and in what manner. Likewise, the problems
of social order and social change have been enduring preoccupations. On a
deeper level, all major political or social theorists in the Western tradition
have been concerned, implicitly or explicitly, with the nature of man and
of the good life. But, it may be asked, does not a given problem receive its
true meaning only in relation to its surrounding context? In relations to the
criteria of rationality, systems of values and social structures in which it is
embedded? The historicist need not answer in the affirmative: crucial here is
the level of abstraction at which we pitch our discourse. When we claim that
there are no ‘permanent problems’ in philosophy, we mean that the forms

=== p. 165 ===

taken by certain abiding (assuming they are abstractly framed) questions
will be determined by the particular culture or period. Formulating the
position in this way is not merely an exercise in semantic hair-splitting. For
to accept that there are universal ‘necessities or utilities of social life’ is to
concede that past institutions, customs, works of art and philosophies will
speak to us — and may have some bearing on the present. It seems, then,
that we must reject proposition (2) — past thought must be completely
dissolved into its precise context. Gramsci, it is evident, does just this.
   While he never directly discusses any permanent substratum of human
needs and concerns,?! much of what he says becomes incomprehensible
and self-contradictory unless we attribute to him some such conception. For
while he insisted that past ideas be firmly located in their socio-historical
contexts, and not uncritically applied in divergent circumstances, he never
attempted to dissolve these ideas into the historical process. In the final
analysis, social practice determines what is thought; it does not follow,
however, that what is thought cannot, in some senses and in varying
degrees, transcend its context. In this connection, Gramsci makes two
separate points. First, he notes that particular authors usually think and
write in a way that they regard as relevant to what their predecessors wrote;
they seek, in other words, to elaborate, reshape, or rebut their predecessors:
‘each philosopher cannot ignore the philosophers who have preceded him
and, indeed, usually acts as if his philosophy were a polemic against or a
development of preceding philosophies’.2? It need scarcely be pointed out
here that Gramsci is right. To take one obvious example, Marsilius of Padua
plainly borrows arguments from Aristotle when countering papal claims
to secular authority (for example, the self-sufficient nature of the political
community and its possession of all necessary means for the maintenance
of internal peace and order). Gramsci goes on to draw the following
conclusion: once we eliminate what is ‘social’ from a work of philosophy,
there still remains a ‘residue’ — to use his word — which cannot be explained
by the historical context. Although philosophies are ‘expressions of real
historical development’,23 social exigencies are conceived by particular
philosophers in ‘an individual and personal manner’, and the ‘importance’
of this is not to be denied.24 Elsewhere, he refers to this ‘individual’ element
as the ‘ahistorical’ part of a philosophical system, in the sense that it does
not correspond to ‘contemporary conditions of life’.2> It is also true, says
Gramsci (and this is the second way in which theoretical products may
transcend their historical contexts), that the ‘actuality’ or ‘fecundity’ of
certain ideas survives the demise of their social precipitants; but the extent
to which this is so can only be established by empirical investigation:

  The question arises whether a theoretical ‘truth’ discovered in
  correspondence with a specific practice can be generalized and

=== p. 166 ===

166                           Joseph V. Femta

  deemed universal ... The proof of its universality consists precisely
  in that which it can become: (a) a stimulus to know better the
  concrete reality of a situation different from the one in which
  it was discovered (this is the prime measure of its fecundity);
  (b) when it has stimulated and helped this better understanding
  of concrete reality as if it were originally an expression of it.76

In keeping with this approach, he declaims against those who hold
‘that the whole heritage of the past must be rejected’. On the contrary,
there exist certain ‘instrumental values’, capable of being ‘elaborated and
refined’,27 and these must be distinguished from ‘the transient philosophical
values that have to be rejected outright’.28 What are these ‘instrumental
values’? Among them, Gramsci includes concepts or ideas like natural
rights, the ‘intrinsic value’ of which is ‘limited’ by their historicity, ‘but
not negated’.29 He was, in fact, intrigued by the possibility of using the
splendid ideals of the French Revolution to undermine the bourgeois
hegemony. Such ideals were clearly capable of rising above the social
order and social classes which spawned them:

  The ideas of quality, of fraternity, of liberty excite passions among
  those strata of men who see themselves neither equal, nor brothers of
  other men, nor free in their social interactions. Thus it happens that in
  every radical movement of the multitude, in one manner or another,
  in the mould of particular ideologies, these claims are put forward.3°

Needless to say, Gramsci, as a good Marxist, was not suggesting that
Enlightenment ideals could be taken over in their original form, still less
that we could accept the underlying conceptual framework from which
they arose. This framework, as is well known, conceived man in abstract
fashion; that is, individuals were emancipated by logical abstraction from
their historic connections and from every social necessity; the concept of
society was reduced to its atomic constituents, to the sum of the individuals
composing it. Abstract categories of individual psychology, it was thought,
sufficed for the explanation of all human facts. It is hardly surprising that
this notion of the individual as prior in some sense to the society originated
in the early bourgeois epoch, because seeing oneself in this manner is a
necessary part of the form of life of the entrepreneur in a regime of free
enterprise. For the entrepreneur the rest of society is an agglomeration of
individuals with whom he must interact in such a way as to realize a profit,
and with whom he can enter into contractual relations. Society, according
to this view, is created by the voluntary agreement of free and independent
individuals to protect their property. Here we find the foundation of modern
concepts of ‘rights’ and ‘freedom’. As the economy became more integrated,
nationally and internationally, as work situations became more socialized,

=== p. 167 ===

and as new discoveries in the social sciences pointed to the profound effects
of environmental conditioning, the underlying assumptions of classical liberal theory lost much of their force. To present them as eternal verities is to fail
to realize that ways of looking at the world are organically linked to concrete
modes of activity. And yet, as Gramsci indicates, ideas and values integral
to this theory represent an advance for mankind and still carry conviction.
Even if Hobbes and Locke did provide.a political doctrine corresponding
to (and sanctioning) incipient capitalist economic relations, as well as the
state structures necessary to maintain these, much of what they said is
still valuable and worthy of being ‘absorbed’ into modern theorizing.3!
    Let me add an example of my own to help illustrate this general
point. Consider Aristotle. The system he constructed was determined in
its most essential characteristics by the conditions prevailing within the
confines of ancient Greek society. The postulates of his thought were: the
general superiority of the Greeks, the natural justice of slavery as a basis of
social organization, and the incompatibility of bread-winning pursuits with
the moral and intellectual attributes of good citizenship. All these ideas now
strike us as outmoded, if not patently ridiculous. Yet Aristotle also enunciated principles which, justifiably, are still features of political analysis: for
instance, his notion that social stability is most to be found where extremes
of wealth and poverty are unknown and the middle class is strongest; his
analytical distinction between the underlying causes of revolution and the
immediate factors which trigger it. Interestingly enough, the one example
Skinner offers to ‘prove’ that past thought is irrelevant to our own culture
and period is based on a gross simplification of Plato, whose views
on democracy and participation are ‘historicized’ as follows (2:66):
   As soon as we begin to study Plato’s actual arguments, however,
   the sense in which the issue of participation is the same for himself
   and ourselves dissolves into absurdity. What we are most likely to
   learn from Plato is that the cook should not participate because
   he is a slave. It is hard to see what problems of participation
   in modern representative democracies are likely to be advanced
   by the application of this particular piece of perennial wisdom.
Regardless of what Plato said about cooks and slaves, and notwithstanding
the strange myth about people being born with different ‘metals’ in their
souls, the fact remains that his justification of hierarchy embraces
arguments that still enjoy currency: the need for expertise, the tendency for democracy to produce cultural mediocrity, the conception
of society as a system of interlocking needs and functions requiring
a strict division of labour. Whether or not we agree with Plato, we
must allow that at least some of his concerns and arguments are neither
alien to us nor impossible to incorporate into our own political thinking.

=== p. 168 ===

   The goal of historicism, properly conceived, is not to devastate the entire
philosophical legacy of mankind, but (primarily) to ensure that positions of
the past are not arbitrarily detached from their explanatory context and simply reproduced in the present, without due regard for subsequent intellectual
discoveries or changed social conditions. For example, no historicist would,
like Nozick in Anarchy, State and Utopia, try to revive wholesale modes
of theorizing appropriate to the seventeenth century. What is ‘dead’ in the
thought of our ancestors must always be presumed to outweigh the part
which is ‘living’. But the historicist need not operate on the facile assumption
that past ideas are entirely and inextricably bound up in a straitjacket
of particular circumstances, particular questions and particular intentions.
Skinner writes of the history of political thought as if it were merely a
series of disconnected intellectual events. But if every historical utterance
and action is a unique event, historical inquiry itself becomes impossible.
The historian must, unavoidably, pursue analogies, make comparisons,
identify regularities, and use general concepts. If all historical events are
sui generis, then we cannot write history; we can only pile up documents.
But this argument raises a tricky question the centrality of which to the
whole debate does not prevent it from being curiously ignored: namely,
what is history? The revisionists refuse to recognize this as a matter open
to dispute: history is what they assume it is, and that is the end of it. Thus
they can issue solemn pronouncements on what is ‘historically correct’ and
what is ‘historically illegitimate’32 in the absence of any serious examination
of the concept of history itself. What is its nature? Its purposes? We shall
briefly consider these questions next, in the course of our consideration
of proposition (3) — the intellectual historian should not concern himself
with the validity or present significance of past ideas; texts must not
be treated as vehicles for the exercise of the analyst’s own preoccupations.
   The positivist theory of knowledge rests on a complete disjunction of subject and object. Facts, like sense impressions, impinge on the observer from
outside and are independent of his consciousness. The process of reception
is passive: the external world of fact ‘speaks for itself’, and man’s knowledge
only translates, or reflects, what takes place in the primary world of ‘given’
things. While it was once fashionable to base historical research on such
epistemological suppositions, they have, with good reason, fallen into general disrepute. To speak plainly, purely descriptive history is impossible. More
than one construction can always be placed on a given collection of data.
From the welter of perceptible things, we must choose, and this requires
abstraction. The historical observer never confronts a bare and simple fact,
unrelated to a broader context. Every fact has significance for him only
because it fits into a system of ideas he has already formed. The historian
must organize historical phenomena according to categories. But whence
does he derive these categories? His practical preferences and attitudes

=== p. 169 ===

will inevitably influence the questions he asks, the facts he selects and the
connections he perceives; and such preferences and attitudes will ultimately
mirror the historian’s own culture. Historical narrative is always dependent
on the culture in which and from which it springs. This conception of the
historian’s enterprise seems compatible with the historicist endeavour to
discover the unique features of any given event or utterance — those that can
be comprehended only with reference to the specific historical context. Even
Dilthey realized that the historian’s understanding is necessarily limited by
his own experience, his own ‘customs, habits, political circumstances and
religious processes’.33 The point is, as Croce rightly notes, ‘that only an
interest in the life of the present can move one to investigate past fact’.
Therefore, ‘this past fact does not answer to a past interest, but to a present
interest’. This is the reasoning behind his famous dictum: ‘every true history
is contemporary history’. History, that is to say, ‘if it means something and is
not an empty echo’, responds to problems that ‘come forth from the bosom
of life’.34 Historical enquiry, in contrast to mere chronicle, must be governed
‘by the practical and scientific needs of a definite moment or epoch’.35
An event conceived as having no relation to present life would have no
historical value. True, a full understanding of worlds remote from our own
can never be achieved through the myopic application of our own ideas and
valuations; on the other hand, the historian can view the past only through
the ideas of the present. And, if he is practising ‘true history’, he brings
the past into relation with our contemporary life not merely as an act of
comparison, but as an actual widening of our apprehension of the present.
   Gramsci accepted all of this. For him, as for Croce, ‘history is always
contemporary history’, guided by the practical interests of the historian.3¢
History, as opposed to dead chronicle or source material, is always relevant
to our present needs and situations. The story of the past, he declares,
‘cannot but be written with and for present interests’.37 In fact, Gramsci
attacks all claims for a ‘disinterested’ historiography; that is, an historiography purporting to exemplify an ‘external “objectivity”’°* Such
claims are found wanting on two counts. In the first place, they presuppose
the notion that such objectivity is possible. But, according to Gramsci, the
analysis of reality must be filtered through a priori theoretical assumptions —
a set of categories and a hierarchy of values, which are culturally determined.

  An investigation into a series of facts to discover the relations
  between them presupposes a ‘concept’ that permits one to distinguish
  that series of facts from other possible ones. How can there occur a
  choice of facts to be adduced as proof of the truth of one’s own
  assumptions if one does not possess a pre-existent criterion of choice?
  But what will this criterion of choice be, if not something superior to
  each single fact under investigation? An intuition, a conception, which

=== p. 170 ===

  must be regarded as having a complex history, a process that is to
  be connected with the whole process of the development of culture.3?

Even if it were possible, argues Gramsci, ‘external’ or ‘disinterested’
history would be undesirable. The purpose of history should be to make
men more self-conscious and effective as political actors. Knowledge of
the past is of use only in so far as it illuminates the present.4° Gramsci
is not, of course, saying that historical reality authoritatively prescribes
solutions to practical problems; it simply serves to make action more
rational by clarifying the historical origins of contemporary dilemmas,
by indicating the range of realistic choice, and by providing a treasure
trove of ideas and insights, models and analogies.
   But if interpretation always emerges from an encounter with the
practical concerns of the interpreter, does it not to become a matter
of political taste or even whim? The answer is no. To argue that the
study of history is axiological, an enterprise wherein facts are selected and
questions formulated from the standpoint of values, is not to offer a license
for anarchy. The influence, however profound, of theories or perspectives
on men’s perception and understanding is one thing; the (extreme relativist)
claim that historical facts are purely the product of theory and therefore
incapable of distinguishing reality from fiction, truth from falsehood, is
quite another. Gramsci, despite his rejection of empiricism, was animated
by the spirit of empirical inquiry; for him, generalizations and theoretical
constructs are worthless unless tested against the real world of observed
experience, of ‘hard’ facts.41 While (on his view) the interpretation of the
past is always a practical endeavour, conducted from within the horizon
of the present, by no means does it follow that the interpreter is justified
in mutilating the evidence to suit his preconceptions or political passions.
   In the prison notebooks, Gramsci’s attitude towards history is well
revealed in those pages he devotes to an interpretation of Machiavelli.42 The
Sardinian felt that his own situation was in a sense parallel to Machiavelli’s,
and, as one commentator has perceptively observed, ‘meditation upon this
historical connection helped him to formulate his own position’.43 What
is the ‘connection’? Machiavelli was concerned with the seizure of power
by Renaissance princes and the unification of Italy; Gramsci with the
revolutionary activities of the Marxist Party and the building of socialism.
Both men wanted to mobilize the Italian people for a common purpose
and develop a theory (and technique) of politics enabling the ‘outsiders’
to overturn the established order. Gramsci’s own thought certainly bears
the imprint of various Machiavellian ideas: among them, the belief that
fortuna can yield to men bold enough to conquer her, and the ‘principled
realism’ which fuses concern for ‘what ought to be’ with clear-eyed
appreciation of the limits imposed by the extant constellation of forces.

=== p. 171 ===

                 Historicist critique of ‘revisionist’ methods             Wye
Does this dialogue with the Florentine’s ghost constitute a deviation from
historicist principles? Not in Gramsci’s eyes. While ‘Machiavelli is a man
wholly of his period’, whose ‘political science represents the philosophy of
his time’,#4 it is nevertheless possible to use his observations and precepts
as a reference point for reflection on contemporary society. To Gramsci,
then, it is perfectly legitimate for the intellectual historian to treat the
great texts as vehicles for the exercise of his own preoccupations — so
long as this does not result in outright distortion or disregard for historical
‘conditions and exigencies’.45 (In any case, the particular interpretations
he arrives at will inescapably be influenced by these very preoccupations.)
   There is nothing unhistorical about this contemporary approach. To
preach otherwise is to misconceive the character of historical inquiry.
To repeat, we cannot understand the human past save in terms of its
relation to ourselves and our world, unless we trace it backwards from
the present. Skinner himself shows some recognition of this necessity:
‘We must classify in order to understand, and we can only classify
the unfamiliar in terms of the familar’ (2:31). The full implications of this
statement, however, apparently elude him.
   We are now in a position to consider propositions (4) and (5) together.
They are, respectively: historicity demands that we focus on what an author
consciously intended to say; and no subsequent account of a thinker’s enterprise could survive the demonstration that it is itself dependent upon the
use of anachronistic criteria of description and classification. Once all the
above points are recognized, the case for these two propositions vanishes;
and many of the methods or practices Skinner and other revisionists hope
to banish from the sphere of historical explanation appear perfectly proper
— indeed necessary. A quasi-religious fixation on intentions can only
impoverish our approach to the history of ideas, diminishing our capacity
to learn from our forebears (and let it be noted that we can learn from their
failings as well as their successes). Consider the ‘mythology of coherence’.
Sometimes intellectual historians do seem determined to inflict a coherence
‘at all costs’ (2:39) on the object(s) of their study. Many are loath to admit
that the theorists they have chosen for analysis may have contradicted
themselves or simply changed their minds over time. Such admissions make
it difficult to enclose a thinker within a tidy and exciting formula. But this
pursuit of a spurious coherence is only the diseased variant of two related
(and quite healthy) interpretative strategies, both of which are arbitrarily
rejected by the revisionists. The first is the attempt to impose system or
order on a disjointed body of thought. Some thinkers just never got around
to arranging their ideas in logical sequences or coherent wholes, and if we
are to expound or assess their respective contributions, the ordering process
is left to us. The end products may be ‘rationalist constructs’, which never
did actually exist in the form we have given them, but so what? How,

=== p. 172 ===

IOs                            Joseph V. Femia

for example, could we even begin to comprehend Gramsci’s fragmented
and disorganized Quaderni if we did not endeavour to elaborate his notes
‘to a degree of formal intellectual articulation which there is no evidence
that they ever attained’?46 The second strategy is to ‘search for an ‘inner
coherence’ underlying (and perhaps explaining) apparent contradictions.
Skinner is especially scathing about all such attempts, which he dismisses
as ‘metaphysical’   (2:40 — 3). Now      (as noted above), in certain cases,
the desire to detect an inner coherence has degenerated into a misguided
attempt to iron out even genuine inconsistencies in the name of some higher
unity. But the fact that such misguided attempts exists does not mean, pace
Skinner, that all attempts to find hidden consistency must be misguided.
This apparent flaw in his logic is explained by his failure to accept that
what an agent is in fact doing in performing an action may have little or no
connection with his actual intentions. There is a crucial difference between
an idea and the bout of thinking it reflects.’ Although an idea is the product
of the thinking which went into it, it also transcends that thinking. There
may be logical relations between a person’s ideas which do not correspond
to any psychological relations between the thought processes which led
respectively to those ideas — logical relations of which he may be unaware.
Which brings us to a general observation: not all thinkers understand the
full theoretical or logical implications of what they say. Assume, for the
sake of argument, that Locke did not imtend to furnish an ideological
justification of capitalism. If the historian lets the matter rest there, he has
not succeeded in telling the whole story. For, by removing all natural-law
limitations on the private appropriation of property, Locke necessarily
conferred moral legitimacy upon the emergent capitalist order — an order
incompatible with such limitations and founded on massive concentrations
of private wealth. Otherwise stated, a defence of capitalist economic
relations is inherent in his doctrine of property rights. If he was unconscious
of this fact, then he, quite literally, did not know what he was doing.
   That a thinker might misconstrue or simply remain blind to the logic of
his own ideas is, one would think, intuitively obvious; but Skinner and his
disciples are advocating a form of historical analysis which is contrary to
common sense and ordinary experience. In everyday conversation we leap
from expression to expression, filling gaps, removing apparent inconsistencies, drawing inferences, and so develop an intellectually elaborated result,
which is our understanding of what the other person has said. Moreover,
when we try to understand an individual as such — his character, his
thoughts, and so on — it never occurs to us to confine ourselves to his
own self-image; on the contrary, we strive to uncover the hidden premises
(psychological or social) as well as the consequences (logical or practical)
of his behaviour and statements. What the revisionists never do is to
explain why the procedures needed to gain an understanding of historical

=== p. 173 ===

actors must so diverge from the procedures we manifestly use to acquire
an understanding of our contemporaries. To be sure, an historian may be
able to give an explanation of unconscious influences on a thinker which
illuminates his ideas in a way he himself did not understand. This, of course,
is a commonplace of Marxist historiography, but is by no means confined to
it. Built into Dilthey’s concept of hermeneutic exegesis, for example, is the
idea that we should seek to understand an author better than he understood
himself. Because expressions may contain more than the agent is aware of,
the analyst can never, in his quest for understanding, concentrate exclusively
on a reconstruction of conscious purposes.47 Furthermore, a thinker can
fail to grasp the potentialities of his thought. For example, many who
have contributed to the shaping of the modern secular consciousness had
no intention of doing so. The Reformation thinkers (who helped to shift
the focus of religious thought from contemplation of the divine to man’s
temporal needs and concerns) are a case in point. Now Skinner does not
deny that we can be legitimately interested in the retrospective significance
of a philosophical work; he only wishes to claim that this significance has
nothing to do with the historical meaning of the work and is therefore
a peripheral (if not actually extraneous) object of historical investigation
(2:43 — 5). But this is merely an arbitrary assertion. Dilthey’s approach
to ‘meaning’ (and the tasks of the historian) seems much more plausible.
For him, a particular act ‘gains meaning from its relationship with the
whole, from the connection between past and future, between individual
and mankind’.48 Unearthing the historical meaning of an action, on this
conception, is not equivalent to discovering its ‘intended illocutionary force’
(though this is a valid starting point); it involves, above all, an apprehension
of the importance or impact (at various levels) of the action in question.4?
    All the above considerations point to this: what an author is doing
in composing a text or set of utterances cannot be understood solely
or even mainly in terms of his intention(s). Thus (assuming sufficient
textual evidence can be found) there is no historical impropriety in saying
that Rousseau’s Social Contract amounts to a theoretical justification of
totalitarianism, or that Locke’s Second Treatise embodies a defence of
exploitation and unlimited capital accumulation, or that Machiavelli’s
Prince — and here we quote Gramsci — contains ‘in nuce both the
separation of powers and parliamentarism’.°° Although such statements
disregard subjective intentions, they may nevertheless be accurate and help
us to assess the limitations or strengths of the works in question. Of
course, in Skinner’s opinion, attempts to evaluate past ideas are pointless,
if not literally meaningless. But he overlooks an important consideration
emphasized by Gramsci: the intellectual historian ignores the mistakes of
past philosophies only at our peril, for these mistakes ‘although made in
the past’, have a nasty habit of being ‘reproduced in the present’.5! World

=== p. 174 ===

views that correspond to previous phases of historical development have
‘left stratified deposits in popular philosophy’, and for this reason, the
evaluation of past thought is much more than an academic exercise:
it becomes a voyage of self-discovery, in which the*historian/critic lays
bare the deeply rooted assumptions of his own (and his culture’s) mode
of thought. ‘To criticize one’s own conception of the world’, Gramsci
tells us, ‘means criticism of all hitherto existing philosophy.’ He then adds,
  The point of departure of critical elaboration is the consciousness
  of what one really is; it is ‘knowing thyself? as a product of the
  historical process, which has deposited in each of us an infinity
  of traces, without leaving an inventory ... Philosophy cannot be
  separated from the history of philosophy.>2
   If we follow Skinner’s instructions, we can never produce “contemporary
history’ — historical knowledge that has as its sounding-board and measuring rod contemporary preoccupations and concerns. The methods and practices denounced by Skinner are precisely the methods and practices which
enable us to separate what is valuable from what is erroneous or transient
(tied to a determinate social form) in the philosophical works of the past.
How, it may be asked, can we ever learn from past thought unless we allow
historians to criticize, to examine historical trends, to make transhistorcal
comparisons, to impose system where there is none, to uncover subterranean
or unconscious assumptions, to pose artificial questions — our questions —
to draw out implications? For Skinner, as we have seen, this is a pseudo-problem, because he simply assumes that the ideas of our ancestors are, for
all intents and purposes, extinct. Each generation, he seems to be saying,
must begin over again all the work done since the childhood of humanity.
But political ideas cannot be created ex nihilo: we are crucially dependent
on our philosophical tradition. Innovation in political thought rarely, if ever,
consists of unprecedented originality. Rather, it is a matter of extending and
rearranging old ideas, shifting emphasis among them, playing variations on
them and so forth. We expand our range of vision and crystallize our
own political thinking by meditating on our philosophical predecessors.
If Skinner really believes that we can ‘do our thinking for ourselves’,
then he entertains an implausible view of political conceptualization.

                                      IV

Skinner’s exhortation to students of past philosophy to practise austerities
so that they might be delivered from all temptations to violate his canons
of historicity is to render intellectual history gratuitously barren. It is,
I would contend, one of the functions of history ‘to cast’, in E. H.

=== p. 175 ===

                   Historictst critique of ‘revisionist’ methods                175

Carr’s    words,   ‘a beam    of the past over         the issues which   dominate
present   and future’.   Revisionist   intellectual    history can, at best, issue
in what     Labriola   called ‘the empiricism         of a boundless   erudition’.53
At the conclusion of his famous article, Skinner remarks (2:67):
   [I]t is a commonplace — we are all Marxists to this extent — that our
   own society places unrecognized constraints upon our imaginations. It
   deserves, then, to become a commonplace that the historical study of
   the ideas of other societies should be undertaken as the indispensable
   and the irreplaceable means of placing limits on those constraints.
But it is precisely this estimable goal which is rendered unattainable by his
curious methodological strictures.

