=== chunk: skinner-2002-visions-of-politics-vol1/ch10-retrospect ===
title: Retrospect — Studying rhetoric and conceptual change
source_pdf: docs/sources/skinner-2002-visions-of-politics-vol1/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 193-205
page_scheme: pdf
plan_page_start: 193
plan_page_end: 205
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 193 ===

                                               IO

    Retrospect: Studying rhetoric and conceptual change

I have been concerned in several of the previous chapters with the
prospect of treating the study of changing concepts as a distinct form
of historical enquiry. As I have sought to stress, if we wish to write this
kind of history it seems to me that we shall do well to concentrate in particular on the concepts we employ to describe and appraise what Hobbes
called our artificial world, the world of politics and morality. This in turn
means that we shall need to focus on the various terms — the entire normative vocabulary — in which such concepts are habitually expressed. As
I argued in chapters 8 and 9, these terms, the paradigms of which are
the names of the virtues and vices, are those which perform evaluative
as well as descriptive functions in natural languages. ‘They are basically
used to describe actions and the motives for which they are performed.
But if the criteria for applying one or other of these terms can plausibly
be claimed to be reflected in some given action or state of affairs, then
the application of the term serves not only to describe but at the same
time to evaluate it.
   I began to make such normative vocabularies a subject of my own historical research in the 1970s, and it was during those years that the original versions of chapters 8 and g were published. One reason for writing
those articles was my wish to dispute the view — then prevalent in Anglophone philosophy — that we can validly speak (as ‘T- D. Weldon had done
in the title of a classic text) of the vocabulary of politics’ and that we can
likewise speak (as R. M. Hare had done in an even more influential book)
of the language of morals.* This assumption seemed to me well worth
disputing in the name of a more historically-minded acknowledgement
that different societies may conceptualise these domains in different and
 This chapter is a revised and extended version of an article that originally appeared under the
 title of ‘Rhetoric and Conceptual Change’ in The Finnish Yearbook of Political Thought, 3 (1999),
 pp: 60-73.
 Weldon 1953.       ? Hare 1952.

=== p. 194 ===

possibly even incommensurable ways. Those two essays may thus be said
to have embodied an advance (or at least a change of mind) from the
position I had earlier adopted in the essay reprinted here as chapter 4, in
which I had still been content to assume that moral and political theory
possess their own distinct and relatively stable vocabularies.
   I had a second and more basic motivation for wishing to study the
changing use of concepts. I wanted to question the assumption influentially propagated by Arthur Lovejoy and his disciples about the proper
task of the historian of ideas. Lovejoy had argued that, beneath the surface of ideological debate, there will always be a range of perennial and
unchanging ‘unit ideas’ which it becomes the task of the intellectual historian to uncover and trace.3 Against this contention I tried once more
to speak up for a more radical contingency in the history of thought.*
This part of my programme (if I may speak in such elevated terms) was
already announced in the original version of the article reprinted here
as chapter 4. Drawing on a suggestion made by Wittgenstein in his later
work, I argued that there cannot be a history of unit ideas as such, but
only a history of the various uses to which they have been put by different
agents at different times. There is nothing, I ventured to suggest, lying
beneath or behind such uses; their history is the only history of ideas to
be written.
   One way of expressing my underlying commitment would thus be to
say that I wanted to treat the understanding of concepts as always, in part,
a matter of understanding what can be done with them in argument.
In announcing this belief, as I initially did in the essay reprinted here
as chapter 4, I declared my allegiance to one particular tradition of
twentieth-century social thought. The tradition may perhaps be said to
stem from Nietzsche, although I originally encountered it myself in the
social philosophy of Max Weber, as my discussions in chapters 7 and 8
will have made clear. Like Nietzsche, Weber believed that our concepts
not only alter over time, but are incapable of providing us with anything
more than a series of changing perspectives on the world in which we
live and have our being. Our concepts form part of what we bring to the
world in our efforts to make sense of it. The shifting conceptualisations
to which this process gives rise constitute the very stuff of ideological

3 Lovejoy 1960.
* But Lovejoy’s approach has been valuably restated and defended in Oakley 1984, pp. 15—40. For
  Oakley’s reaction to my own remarks on Lovejoy see Oakley 1984, pp. 28-31.

=== p. 195 ===

debate, so that it makes no more sense to regret than to deny that such
conceptual changes continually take place.
    If we endorse this vision ofpolitics, as I do, we place a question-mark
against all those neo-Kantian projects of our time in which we encounter
an aspiration to halt the flux of politics by trying definitively to fix the analysis of key moral terms. I continue to harbour a special prejudice against
those who, in adopting this approach, imagine an ideal speech situation
in which everyone (everyone?) would make the same moral and cognitive
judgements.° There are no moral or cognitive judgements which are
not mediated by our concepts, and it seems to me that even our most
apparently abstract concepts are historical through and through.
    I have been less concerned with questioning this approach, however,
than with considering what kind of history needs to be written if the phenomenon of conceptual change is to be fruitfully explored. It is worth
adding that the view at which I have arrived is in some respects similar to
the one embodied in Reinhart Koselleck’s now celebrated programme
for the study of Begriffsgeschichte, histories of concepts.° Koselleck and I
both assume that we need to treat our normative concepts less as statements about the world than as tools and weapons of ideological debate.
Both of us have perhaps been influenced by Foucault’s Nietzschean contention that ‘the history which bears and determines us has the form of
a war’./
    One reason why it is perhaps worth identifying my original targets in
this way is that a number of my critics have supposed that what I was
aiming to discredit was Koselleck’s project of writing Begriffsgeschichte.
But this was never the case. It is no doubt deplorable, but it is nevertheless a fact, that when in the late 1960s and 1970s I wrote the essays of
which I have been speaking, I had no knowledge of Koselleck’s research
programme. I did not come to appreciate the distinctiveness and magnitude of his achievement until Melvin Richter made his work available to
Anglophone readers in his articles of the 1980s® and later in his important study, The History of Social and Political Concepts, published as recently
as 1995.9

5 Commenting on this commitment, Geuss 1981 p. 66 remarks that ‘I find it quite hard to burden pre-dynastic Egyptians, ninth-century French serfs and early-twentieth-century Yanomam6
  tribesmen with the view that they are acting correctly if their action is based on a norm on which
  there would be universal consensus in an ideal speech situation.’
© See, for example, Koselleck 1985, esp. pp. 73-91 and Koselleck 1989. See also the discussion in
  Richter 1995, esp. pp. 26-57.
7 Foucault 1980, p. 114.    8 See in particular Richter 1986 and Richter 1987.      9 Richter 1995.

=== p. 196 ===

   How far one can hope to capture the historicity of concepts by adopting Koselleck’s approach remains a question. '© But if there are any remaining doubts, these ought not in my view to be doubts about the very
idea of writing conceptual histories — or not, at least, if these are histories
of how concepts have been put to use over time. It is perhaps worth
adding that I have even attempted to write some such histories myself,
and two of these studies are included in the present work: in volume 2
I reprint (in a much revised form) an essay originally published in 1989 on
the acquisition of the concept of the State, and in volume 3 I reprint an
associated essay of 1999 on the relationship to this tradition of Hobbes’s
argument in Leviathan. | have also written — in my book Liberty Before
Liberalism — about the rise and fall within Anglophone political theory of
a particular view about the concept of liberty, a view according to which
our freedom should be seen not merely as a predicate of our actions but
as an existential condition in contrast with that of servitude." I do not
consider these studies to be in tension with anything I have written about
the need to understand what can be done with concepts as an element
in the process of recovering their meaning and significance. On the contrary, part of my aim in each of these studies was to indicate why the
concept in question first came to prominence at a particular historical
period by way of indicating what could be done with it that could not be
done in its absence.
   As these remarks will already have made clear, I strongly endorse the
belief that we must be ready as historians of philosophy not merely to
admit the fact of conceptual change but to make it central to our research.
Not only is our moral and social world held in place by the manner in
which we choose to apply our inherited normative vocabularies, but one
of the ways in which we are capable of reappraising and changing our
world is by changing the ways in which these vocabularies are applied. As
I have already tried to show in chapters 8 and 9, there 1s in consequence a
genealogy of all our evaluative concepts to be traced, and in tracing their
changing applications we shall find ourselves looking not merely at the
reflections but at one of the engines of social change. Since I have always
sought to emphasise that innovating ideologists may in consequence be
no less preoccupied with wresting an available moral language to their
own ends than with seeking at the same time to challenge conventional

'° Schmidt 1999 makes some interesting criticisms of Koselleck’s project along these lines, questioning in particular his reliance on dictionaries as sources. For an excellent survey of the issues
   see Hampsher-Monk 1988.
" Skinner 1998, pp. 59-99.

=== p. 197 ===

beliefs, I am startled to find myself accused by a recent critic of failing
to acknowledge the first of these possibilities." Chapter 8 of the present
volume is largely given over to considering this issue, and one of my aims
in discussing the phenomenon of rhetorical redescription below will be
to show that the first possibility as well as the second will always be in play.
   I have already gestured in chapter 9 at what I take to be the fundamental point we need to grasp if we are to study the phenomenon of
conceptual change, but I should like to enlarge on it here. My almost
paradoxical contention is that the various transformations we can hope
to chart will not strictly speaking be changes in concepts at all. They will
be transformations in the applications of the terms by which our concepts
are expressed. ‘hese changes will in turn be of various kinds, but in my
owp research I have chiefly focused on what Kari Palonen in a recent
appraisal 6f my work has helpfully labelled a rhetorical perspective."
I have mainly been interested in the kinds of debate that take place when
we ask whether a given action or state of affairs does or does not license
us to apply some particular evaluative term as an apt description of it.
While this has been my principal interest, however, I should not want it
to be thought that I take this to be the sole or even the most significant
way in which the process of conceptual change can be initiated. Before
turning to consider the rhetorical case in more detail, I should like to
mention two other ways in which the phenomenon of conceptual change
can be historically mapped.
    We can hope in the first place to trace the changing extent or degree to
which a particular normative vocabulary is employed over time. ‘There
are obviously two contrasting possibilities here. ‘The rise within a given
society of new forms of social behaviour will generally be reflected in the
development of corresponding vocabularies in which the behaviour in
question will then be described and appraised. I have already considered
the early-modern European development of commercial society from
this perspective in chapter 8, focusing on the growing salience of an ap-praisive vocabulary centred on such novel values as frugality, industriousness,
punctuality, conscientiousness and the like. ‘The alternative possibility is that
a given society may gradually lose its sense that some particular style
of behaviour deserves to be singled out and valorised. ‘This kind of
change ofheart will generally be registered in the atrophying of the corresponding normative vocabulary. An instructive example is offered by the
2 See Bevir 1999, pp- 49-50 and cf. also Bevir 1997. For a summary restatement of Bevir’s position
   see Bevir 2001.
'3 For an appraisal ofthis perspective see Palonen 1997 and 1999.

=== p. 198 ===

disappearance in contemporary English of a complex vocabulary widely
used in earlier generations to describe and commend an ideal of
gentlemanly conduct, and at the same time to stigmatise any behaviour
liable to undermine it. Such terms as cad and bounder — together with
the contrasting concept of gentlemanliness — are still included in historical
dictionaries of the English language, but they are obsolete as terms of
appraisal now that the patterns of conduct they were used to evaluate
have lost their social significance.
   Such examples arguably provide the best evidence in favour of the
claim that concepts have a history — or rather, that the terms we use
to express our concepts have a history. They rise and fall, and in some
cases they finally disappear from sight. I confess, however, that this kind
of long-term shift in the fortuna of concepts has not remained one of
my primary interests. Here my approach differs markedly from that of
Koselleck and his associates, who have chiefly been preoccupied with
the slower march of time and much less concerned than I have been
with the pointillist study of sudden conceptual shifts." One reason why
I have been less interested in such broader chronologies is that, in the
examples I have given, the shifting vocabularies are little more than indexes or reflections of deeper transformations in social life. This in turn
means that, if a history of these conceptual changes were to have any
explanatory value, the explanations would have to be given at the level
of social life itself. But I have no general theory about the mechanisms of
social transformation, and I am somewhat suspicious of those who have.
Certainly I am deeply suspicious of any theories in which Time itself appears as an agent of change. As John Dunn remarked in a classic article
long ago, such metaphors have a nasty habit of reappearing as objectifications, thereby encouraging a discredited form of intellectual history
in which ‘Tradition is always doing battle with Progress, Enlightenment
with Superstition, and so forth."
   I next want to build on what I said in chapter 9 about a second form
of conceptual change, or rather a second way in which the vocabularies
we use to describe and appraise our social world continually wrinkle
and slide. ‘This further process occurs when the capacity of a normative
vocabulary to perform and encourage particular acts of appraisal alters
either in direction or in intensity. Changes of this kind will usually reflect

‘4 See, for example, Richter’s discussion of the handling of the concept of Herrschaft and its history in
   Koselleck’s Geschichtliche Grundbegriffe in Richter 1995, pp. 58-78. For a fuller comparison between
   my approach and that of Koselleck see Guilhaumou 2000.
*) Dunn 1980, esp. p. 13.                 ,

=== p. 199 ===

an underlying attempt to modify existing social perceptions and beliefs,
and these efforts will in turn be featured in the language of evaluation in
one oftwo principal ways. A term generally used to commend an action
or state of affairs may be used instead to express and solicit disapproval,
or else a condemnatory term may be used to suggest that, contrary to
received assumptions, what is being described is deserving of praise.
   What is being proposed in such cases is that a society should reconsider
and perhaps transvalue some of its moral values. Sometime we can even
pinpoint such dramatic suggestions at specific moments within individual
texts. Consider, for example, Machiavelli’s evident desire in chapter 16
of Il Principe to insist that the virtue of liberality, so highly prized in
the courtly societies of Renaissance Europe, may actually be the name
of a dangerous vice. ‘© Or consider Baldassare Castiglione’s contrasting
desire in his Libro del Cortegiano of 1528 to single out the quality he labels
sprezzatura — the quality of nonchalantly refusing to set a high price on
anything — and to commend it as one of the leading virtues of civilised
life.” ‘The unsettling implications of the latter suggestion can be seen
at their clearest in the English version of the Cortegiano first issued by
Sir Thomas Hoby in 1561. Faced with the need to find a translation
for sprezzatura, Castiglione’s invented term, Hoby chose to render it as
recklessness.'® He thereby confronted his puritan contemporaries with the
unsettling thought that a deliberate refusal to act with foresight and
conscientiousness might be deserving of the highest praise.’9
    Whenever such suggestions are widely taken up, a whole society may
eventually come to alter its attitude towards some fundamental value
or practice and alter its normative vocabulary accordingly. We could
therefore say that these are examples of conceptual change in perhaps
its purest sense. However, I have again paid little attention to the long-term social transformations that cause such appraisive terms to lose — or
to alter the direction of — their evaluative force. This lack of interest again
contrasts strongly with Koselleck’s approach. ‘The reason for my neglect
is the same as before. I lack any talent for writing the kind of social history
that would be required. I also plead guilty to the further charge — levelled,
for example, by Palonen*® — that in contrast to Koselleck I have made
no attempt to investigate the possibility that Time itself may need to be

 © Machiavelli 1960, pp. 66-8.
 7 See Castiglione 1981, pp. 59-60 et passim on the need ‘usar in ogni cosa una certa sprezzatura’.
 '8 Castiglione 1994, Pp. 53"9 On the language of Hoby’s translation see Burke 1995, pp. 66-72. On sprezzatura see Saccone
        1983.
iS)
      ° Palonen 1999, pp. 53-5-

=== p. 200 ===

included in the very meaning of certain concepts. I do indeed neglect
this possibility, but only because I cannot make sense of it.
  I turn finally to re-examine the form of conceptual change in which
I have chiefly been interested, the form I have described as rhetorical
in character, Such changes originate when an action or state of affairs
is described by means of an evaluative term that would not normally
be used in the given circumstances. The aim is to persuade an audience
that, in spite of appearances, the term can properly be applied — in virtue
of its ordinary meaning — to the case in hand. The effect of successfully
persuading someone to accept such a judgement will be to prompt them
to view the behaviour in question in a new moral light. An action they
had previously regarded as commendable may come to seem worthy
of condemnation, while an action they had previously condemned may
seem worthy of praise.
   When, in the early 1970s, I first discussed this technique of rhetorical
redescription, I operated with the assumption that for every evaluative
term there will at any one time be a standard and accepted meaning and
use. This remains the key assumption on which my historical analysis
in chapter 8 is based. As a result, I portray the figure of the innovating
ideologist in that chapter as someone engaged in the manipulation of
a normative vocabulary by a series of what I describe as sleights of
hand. Since that time, however, I have immersed myself in the writings
of the classical theorists of eloquence who originally described the
relevant techniques of rhetorical redescription. As a result I have come
to share their more sceptical understanding of normative concepts and
the fluid vocabularies in which they are habitually expressed. I have
found myself increasingly adopting their assumption that it makes little
sense to speak of evaluative terms as having accepted denotations that
can either be followed or, with varying degrees of disimgenuousness,
effectively manipulated. I have come to appreciate their sense that
there will always be a degree of ‘neighbourliness’, as they liked to call it,
between apparently conflicting evaluative terms. It now seems to me, in
short, that all attempts to legislate about the ‘correct’ use of normative
terms must be regarded as equally ideological in character. Whenever
such terms are employed, their application will always reflect a wish to
impose a particular moral vision on the workings of the social world.
   I should like to end by offering some general reflections about this crucial technique of rhetorical redescription, a technique to which I return in
greater detail in volume 2 chapter 10, and again in discussing Hobbes’s reactions to itin volume g chapter 4. It will be best to begin with the analysis

=== p. 201 ===

furnished by the ancient rhetoricians themselves.?' One of the clearest
accounts is supplied by Quintilian, although he owes an obvious debt
to Cicero, while both of them                are in turn influenced by the pioneering
discussion to be found in Book II of Aristotle’s Art ofRhetoric. Quintilian’s
main discussion of the technique — to which he gives the name
paradiastole — appears in Book IV of his Jnstitutio Oratora as part of his
advice on how to present a narrative of facts. Suppose you find yourself
in a court of law facing an advocate who has managed to describe an act
‘in such a way as to rouse up the judges and leave them full of anger
against your side’.** Suppose too that you cannot hope to deny what happened. How should you proceed? Quintilian’s answer is that ‘you should
restate the facts, but not at all in the same way; you must assign differ-entecauses, a different state of mind and a different motive for what was
done’.?3 Above all, ‘you must try to elevate the action as much as possible
by the words you use: for example, prodigality must be more leniently re-described as liberality, avarice as carefulness, negligence as simplicity of
mind’.*#
    Quintilian had already put forward this last and crucial suggestion in
Book IH, in which he had quoted (although without acknowledgement)
three examples of the same technique mentioned by Aristotle in The
Art of Rhetoric: ‘slander can pass for frankness, recklessness for courage,
extravagance for copiousness’.*> Aristotle had added that the same technique can equally well be used not merely to extenuate the vices but to
depreciate the virtues, as when we denigrate the behaviour of a habitually cautious man by claiming that he is really a person of cold and
designing temperament.?°
   As Quintilian emphasises, the essence of the technique may thus be
said to consist of replacing a given evaluative description with a rival
term that serves to picture the action no less plausibly, but serves at the
same time to place it in a contrasting moral light. You seek to persuade
your audience to accept your new description, and thereby to adopt a
new attitude towards the action concerned. As Quintilian explicitly adds,
this means that strictly speaking we ought not to describe the technique
as a case of substituting one word for another. ‘For no one supposes that
the words prodigality and liberality mean the same thing; the difference

21 All ensuing translations from classical texts are my own.
22 Quintilian 1920-2, IV. II. 75, vol. 2, p. go.     *3 Quintilian 1920-2, IV. II. 76-7, vol. 2, p. go.
24 Quintilian 1920-2, IV. II. 77, vol. 2, pp. 90-2.
25 See Aristotle 1926, I. EX. 28-9, pp. 96-8 and cf. Quintilian 1920-2, II. XII. 4, vol. 1, p. 284.
26 Aristotle 1926, I. IX. 28, p. 96.

=== p. 202 ===

is rather that one person calls something prodigal which another thinks
of as liberality.” What we are really claiming is that the res— the actual
behaviour — possesses a different moral character from that which our
dialectical opponents may have assigned to it.
    Quintilian also explains what makes the use of paradiastolic redescrip-tion a perennial possibility. Drawing once more on Aristotle, he reiterates
that this is due to the fact that many of the vices are ‘neighbours’ of the
virtues. Cicero had already put forward the same explanation in his
De Partitione Oratoria. ‘Cunning imitates prudence, insensibility imitates
temperance, pride in attaining honours and superciliousness in looking
down on them both imitate magnanimity, extravagance imitates liberality and audacity imitates courage.’?® Such a large number of the vices,
in short, stand in ‘neighbourly relations’ with the virtues that a clever
orator will always be able to challenge the proffered evaluation of any
action whatsoever with some show of plausibility.
   One of the defining achievements of Renaissance culture was to
revive and reassess the rhetorical philosophy of the ancient world.
This in turn means that, if we wish to see the techniques perfected
by the ancient rhetoricians put to work again, we need to turn to
the moral philosophy of the Renaissance. Among moralists of that
period, it was Machiavelli who arguably took the lessons of the ancient
rhetoricians most profoundly to heart. Certainly he uses the technique
of paradiastolic redescription with unparalleled audacity in challenging
the political morality of his age. He first employs it in chapter 16 of
Il Principe to question the so-called ‘princely’ virtue of liberality. Two
contrasting rhetorical strategies are at work in this passage. As we have
already seen, one is Machiavelli’s astonishing suggestion that liberality
may not be the name of a virtue. But his other strategy depends on
assuming that liberality and generosity are undeniably the names of
good qualities. While conceding the point, however, he adds that much
of the behaviour usually described and commended as liberal and generous ought rather to be redescribed and condemned as suntuosita, mere
ostentatiousness.*9 Machiavelli’s next chapter questions the princely
virtue of clemency in the same way. He begins by acknowledging that
cruelty is of course a vice, but he insists that many of the actions usually
celebrated as contrasting instances of clemency ought rather to be
redescribed in much less favourable terms.3° The avoidance of cruelty

  *7 Quintilian 1920-2, VIII. VI. 36, vol. 3, p. 322.     28 Cicero 1942, II. XXIII. 81, p. 370.
  *9 Machiavelli 1960, p. 66.     3°, Machiavelli 1960, p. 68.

=== p. 203 ===

for which the Florentines congratulated themselves when they refused
to punish the leaders of the uprising at Pistoia was really an instance of
troppa preta, mere over-indulgence.3' Likewise, the clemency for which
Scipio Africanus became famous in his campaigns against Hannibal
was really an example of his natura facile, his laxity of character.3?
   Nietzsche offers a yet more emphatic account of how easy it is for
vices to present themselves as virtues. This is one of the chief topics
he examines — with an almost horrified fascination — in the opening
essay of The Genealogy of Morality. The passage is a famous one, but his
commentators seem unaware of the fact that the technique he is analysing
and illustrating is precisely that of paradiastolic redescription. Nietzsche
begins by asking whether anyone would like ‘to have a little look down
inte the secret of how ideals are fabricated on this earth’:
   What’s happening down there? Tell me what you see, you with your most
dangerous curiosity — now J am the one who’s listening. —
   — ‘I cannot see anything but I can hear all the better. There is a guarded,
malicious little rumour-mongering and whispering from every nook and cranny.
I think people are telling lies; a sugary mildness clings to every sound. Lies are
turning weakness into an accomplishment, no doubt about it — it’s just as you said.’ —
   —Go on!
   — ‘and impotence which doesn’t retaliate is being turned into “goodness”;
timid baseness is being turned into “humility”; submission to people one hates
is being turned into “obedience” (actually towards someone who, they say, orders this submission — they call him God.) The inoffensiveness of the weakling,
the very cowardice with which he is richly endowed, his standing-by-the-door,
his mevitable position of having to wait, are all given good names such as
“patience”, which is also called the virtue; not-being-able-to-take-revenge is
called not-wanting-to-take-revenge, 1t might even be forgiveness (“for they know
not what they do — but we know what ‘hey are doing!”). ‘They are also talking
about “loving your enemy” — and sweating while they do it.’
   —Go onl...
   ‘But enough! enough! I can’t bear it any longer. Bad air! Bad air! ‘This workshop where ‘deals are fabricated — it seems to me Just to stink of lies.’38

It is Nietzsche’s contention, in short, that the slave morality of the
Christians succeeded in overturning the moral world of antiquity by
rhetorically redescribing a number of vices as their neighbouring virtues.
   For a contrasting example of how a virtue can come to be recognised
as a vice, consider an example recently discussed by Ian Hacking, that
of the history of the concept of child abuse. What appeared as wholesome

  3! Machiavelli 1960, p. 69.   3? Machiavelli 1960, p. 71.   33 Nietzsche 1994, pp. 30-1.

=== p. 204 ===

discipline in the rearing of children in one generation may come to be
viewed as cruelty in the next. Nothing in the conduct of adults towards
children need in the intervening period have changed. What will have
altered, if the new evaluation is accepted, is the sensibility of acommu-nity. The intervening process, in Hacking’s words, will have been one
of ‘inventing new descriptions, providing new ways to see old acts’.3+ A
number of practices previously regarded as acceptable and perhaps even
taken for granted will come to seem morally intolerable. ‘This is not of
course to say that the process is one of coming to see things as they really
are. As before, it is merely a matter of substituting one social philosophy for another, both of which may have seemed rationally defensible at
different times.
   It might appear, however, that in talking in this way about rhetorical redescription we are precisely not talking about conceptual change.
I certainly agree that a number of philosophers have been too ready
to say that what is happening in such disputes is that each party must
‘have a different concept’ of (say) what constitutes child abuse. But if
the disputants are genuinely arguing, they must have the same concept
of what constitutes child abuse. The difference between them will not
be about the meaning ofthe relevant evaluative term, but merely about
the range of circumstances in which they are prepared to apply it. This
caution strikes me as correct and important, but the fact remains that
the outcome of such debates will nevertheless be a form of conceptual
change. ‘The more we succeed in persuading people that a given evaluative term applies in circumstances in which they may never have thought
of applying it, the more broadly and inclusively we shall persuade them
to employ the given term in the appraisal of social and political life. ‘The
change that will eventually result is that the underlying concept will acquire a new prominence and a new salience in the moral arguments of
the society concerned.
   It is true that I have again been less interested in these long-term
changes than in the kind of eprphanic moments dramatised by Nietzsche.
But I acknowledge, of course, that if we are interested in mapping the
rise and fall of particular normative vocabularies we shall also have to
devote ourselves to examining the longue durée. So 1am not unhappy with
Palonen’s recent suggestion that much of my own research might be
regarded as a contribution to one aspect of the vastly more ambitious

3+ Hacking 1995, p. 56. Hacking 1995 pp. 55~68 is partly a paraphrase of the fuller discussion in
   Hacking 1991.
35 Palonen 1999, pp. 56-7.

=== p. 205 ===

programme pursued by Reinhart Koselleck and his associates. Koselleck
is interested in nothing less than the entire process of conceptual change:
I am chiefly interested in one of the techniques by which it takes place.
But the two programmes do not strike me as incompatible, and I hope
that both of them will continue to flourish as they deserve.

