=== chunk: skinner-2002-visions-of-politics-vol1/ch5-motives-intentions ===
title: Motives, intentions and interpretation
source_pdf: docs/sources/skinner-2002-visions-of-politics-vol1/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 108-120
page_scheme: pdf
plan_page_start: 108
plan_page_end: 120
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 108 ===

                Motives, intentions and interpretation

                                                I

We live in post-modern times (I am not the first to notice this) and one of
the more challenging features of post-modern culture has been a deepened scepticism about the traditional humanist project of interpreting
texts. Given this development, it seems well worth asking anew how far
it remains defensible to speak — as I have done with some confidence
in chapter 4 — of recovering the motives and intentions of authors, of
ascribing particular meanings to their utterances, and of distinguishing
acceptable from unacceptable readings of literary or philosophical texts.
This is the far from modest task on which I shall now attempt to make
a modest start.

                                                II

It is not difficult in retrospect to pick out a number of different schools of
thought that converged on the conclusion that questions about authors,
intentions and the meanings of texts ought no longer to be asked. ‘The
exponents of the New Criticism spearheaded an influential attack on the
idea of recovering authorial intentionality when they declared that any
such project will inescapably involve us in a fallacious form of reasoning. As Wimsatt and Beardsley proclaimed in their classic article on the
alleged intentional fallacy, ‘the design or intention of the author is neither
available nor desirable’ as a guide to recovering the meaning of a literary
text.’ Soon afterwards a yet more lethal attack was launched by Roland
Barthes and Michel Foucault when they jointly announced the death of
 This chapter is partly based on my article ‘Motives, Intentions and the Interpretation of Texts’
 in New Literary History 3 (1972), pp. 393-408 and partly on my article ‘From Hume’s Intentions to
 Deconstruction and Back’ in The Journal of Political Philosophy 4 (1996), pp. 142-54.
* Wimsatt and Beardsley 1976, p. 1. This classic article, often republished, originally appeared in
  the Sewanee Review in 1946. Cf. also Wimsatt 1954, Beardsley 1958 and Beardsley 1970.

                                               gO

=== p. 109 ===

                         Motwwes, intentions and interpretation                            QI

the author, thereby burying the time-honoured dwelling-place of motives
and intentionality.’ But by far the most damaging campaign was opened
in the late 1960s and early 1970s by Jacques Derrida when he began to
argue that the very idea oftextual interpretation is a mistake, since there
are no such readings to be gained. There are only misreadings, since it is
an error to suppose that we can ever arrive unambiguously at anything
recognisable as the meaning of a text.3
    A number of different senses of ‘meaning’ were frequently run together in the course ofthese sceptical attacks. At least three discriminable
senses of the term appear to be in play, and we need to begin by trying
if possible to prise them apart. The first is that to ask about meaning in
this context may be equivalent to asking: what do the words mean, or
what do certain specific words or sentences mean, in a given text? (I shall
call this meaning,. ) It seems to be meaning, that Wimsatt and Beardsley
principally have in mind in their essay on the intentional fallacy. They
speak of explicating ‘the meaning of a poem’ by way of ‘our habitual
knowledge of the language, through grammars, dictionaries’ and so on,
and when they turn to discuss a poem by T. S. Eliot they concentrate
on the need to decode ‘the meaning of phrases in the poem’.+ More
recently, Beardsley has reiterated that the proper task of literary critics
is to concentrate on examining ‘textual meaning’, the meaning of the
words in front of us, not the supposed intentions of those who originally
wrote them.°
    When Derrida speaks about the irrecoverability of meaning, he likewise seems in general to be talking about meaning,. He associates the
attempted recovery of meaning with what he calls logocentrism, the belief that meanings originate in the world and are conveyed to us by the
capacity of words to refer to things. This belief is said to give rise, in his
Heideggerian phrase, to a metaphysics of presence; to the illusion that
the truth about the world can be made present to the mind through the
medium of a denotative language. ‘The unavailability of such meanings
stems from the fact that the terms we employ to signify things not only
fail to do so univocally but float apart from what is purportedly signified
until they come to exist in a state of free play. ‘The alleged meanings
of such signifiers are deferred until they ultimately disappear and are
replaced by a state of pure intertextuality.° Here it seems moderately clear
that we are talking about meaning,. As one of Derrida’s Anglophone
     ? Barthes 1979, pp. 73-8; Foucault 1979, pp. 141-60.     3 Derrida 1976, pp. 6-100.
     4 Wimsatt and Beardsley 1976, pp. 6, 11.     5 Beardsley 1992, p. 33.
     ® See Derrida 1976, pp. 6-73 and cf. Derrida 1978, pp. 278-82.

=== p. 110 ===

admirers has more crudely put it, the crucial contention is that the words
we employ to refer to things lack ‘fixed meanings’.’
   By contrast with meaning, , we may instead be asking: what does this
text mean to me? (I shall call this meaning,.)This is the sense that exponents of the New Criticism usually seem to have in mind when they speak
about ‘structures of effects’ and the need to concentrate on assessing
their impact on the reader. The same preoccupation with meaning,
appears to underlie the phenomenological approach to literary criticism.
When Wolfgang Iser, for example, speaks of the reading process as a
‘realisation’ of the text ‘accomplished by the reader’, he seems to be
mainly preoccupied with meaning,, especially when he argues that ‘one
must take into account not only the actual text but also, and in equal
measure, the actions involved in responding to that text’.®
   The theorists who have made it most evident that they are primarily
interested in meaning, are those who have developed the insights of the
phenomenologists into what has come to be called a reader-response approach to interpretation. One eminent exponent has been Paul Ricoeur,
especially in his Hermeneutics and the Human Sciences. Ricoeur concedes that
texts may well have pristine intended meanings, but he stresses that over
the course of time, as well as because of the polysemic and metaphorical features of language, any text will acquire ‘an autonomous space
of meaning which is no longer animated by the intention of its author’.9
Ricoeur’s principal suggestion is that interpreters should concentrate
on these changing public meanings of texts, rather than on the meanings that their original authors may have intended to assign to them.
‘What the text says now matters more than what the author meant to
say’,"° so that the act of interpretation should be viewed as equivalent
to asking what the text now means for us, and hence as equivalent to
appropriating it for our own purposes."
   An even more enthusiastic exponent of the reader-response approach
has been Stanley Fish, especially in his collection of essays entitled
Ts There a Text in this Class? Fish makes it very clear that he is basically
concerned with what I am calling meaning,, especially when he announces at the outset that ‘the reader’s response is not fo the meaning;
it s the meaning’ of a literary text.'* Developing this insight, Fish thinks
of readers so entirely as the sources of meaning that he writes of them as
creators of all the information normally assumed by traditional theories
 7 Harlan 1989, p. 582.    8 Iser 1972, p. 279.  9 Ricoeur 1981, p. 174.
© Ricoeur 1981, p. 201.     On interpretation as appropriation see Ricoeur 1981, pp. 145-64.
* Fish 1980, p. 3.

=== p. 111 ===

of interpretation to be embodied in texts. The act of interpretation is
seen in consequence as ‘the source oftexts, facts, authors and intentions’;
the only meanings we can hope to recover are the meanings we create."3
  Rather than asking about meaning,                 or meaning,, we may instead
be asking: what does a writer mean by what he or she says in a given
text? (I shall call this meaning,.) Sometimes it appears to be this sense
of meaning that Wimsatt and Beardsley have in mind in their purported
exposure of the intentional fallacy. When they speak about ‘the pursuit
of full meanings’ in the course of discussing the problem of allusiveness,
they maintain that the question to be answered is ‘what a poet means’
by what he or she has said. And when they bring their article to a close
by contrasting ‘the true and objective way of criticism’ with ‘the way of
genetic and biographical inquiry’, the question they leave us to ponder
is which method is to be preferred if our aim in studying a poet is to
understand ‘what he meant’.
   Sometimes it is similarly clear that meaning, is what Derrida has in
mind when he writes about the impossibility of recovering the meanings of texts. This certainly seems to be the case in the much-discussed
example he offers of a fragment, found among Nietzsche’s papers, which
reads ‘I have forgotten my umbrella.”!° Even Derrida is willing to concede that in this instance there seems no difficulty about recovering what
Iam calling meaning, , the meaning of the sentence itself. As Derrida remarks, ‘Everyone knows what “I have forgotten my umbrella” means.’”
Derrida’s objection is that we are still left without any means of recovering what I am calling meaning,, that is, of recovering what Nietzsche
may have meant by writing just those words.'® Perhaps, as Derrida concludes, he may have meant nothing at all. Derrida’s point is that we have
no means of knowing, since we have no means of recovering meanings,
and hence no prospect of understanding what (if anything) Nietzsche
may have meant.

                                            Ill

My aim in this ground-clearing chapter is to assess how much attention,
if any, we should pay to the motives and intentions of writers in seeking

  '3 Fish 1980, p. 16.     ‘4 Wimsatt and Beardsley 1976, p. 10.
  9 Wimsatt and Beardsley 1976, p. 13.
  '© Derrida 1979, pp. 122, 123. For a valuable discussion see Hoy 1985, pp. 54-8.
  7 Derrida 1979, p. 128: ‘Chacun comprend ce que veut dire “j’ai oublié mon parapluie”.’
  '8 Derrida 1979, pp. 123, 125, 131.

=== p. 112 ===

to interpret the meaning of what they write. So far I have focused on
a number of confusions attending the discussion of ‘meaning’ in these
debates. I now turn to the other side of the coin, examining the various arguments that have been put forward in defence of the claim that
we should pay no attention to motives or intentions in arriving at our
readings of texts.
   Two main types of argument can be distinguished. One is concerned
with the need for purity in critical procedures, and thus with the claim
that, even if it may be possible to discover such essentially biographical information about a writer, we must never allow such information to
condition and so contaminate our response to their work. Hence it is that
Wimsatt and Beardsley stigmatise the desire to consider anything other
than the information provided by the text itself as a ‘romantic fallacy’.'9
The claim, as one commentator on their theory has expressed it, is that
all works of art must be ‘self-explicatory’. We are merely registering
‘a failure of art and criticism’ if we make use of extraneous information
of an historical or biographical kind.’° As Wimsatt and Beardsley themselves declare, what we must deal with is simply ‘the text itself”.*'
     The other and more prominent argument, however, derives from two
contrasting (indeed incompatible) claims often made about the concepts
of motive and intention themselves. One claim has been that the reason
why critics should pay no attention to such factors is that the motives
and intentions of writers are to be found ‘inside’ their texts, not separate
from them, and accordingly stand in need of no separate consideration.
This is one of the main grounds on which Wimsatt and Beardsley argue
for the irrelevance of intentionality. They ask how a critic can ‘find out
what the poet tried to do’ and answer that ‘if the poet succeeded in
doing it, then the poem itself shows what he was trying to do’.** ‘The
same view has been adopted by a number of more recent commentators
on the so-called intentional fallacy. ‘I. M. Gang, for example, insists that
‘whenever something is plainly and unambiguously said, it hardly makes
sense to ask the speaker what he intended his words to signify’.*? Graham
Hough agrees that ‘with a completely successful poem all is achievement,
and the question of a separately conceivable intention does not arise’.*4
   The other (and incompatible) claim has been that, on the contrary, it
is because motives and intentions stand ‘outside’ a writer’s works, and
accordingly form no part of their structure, that critics should pay no
          '9 Wimsatt and Beardsley 1976, pp. 3, 12.      *° Morris Jones 1964, p. 14.0.
         *t Wimsatt and Beardsley 1976, p. 9.       ** Wimsatt and Beardsley 1976, p. 2.
         23 Gang 1957, p. 178.     *+ Hough 1966, p. 60.

=== p. 113 ===

                           Motwwes, intentions and interpretation                                  95

attention to them in attempting to elucidate the meanings oftexts. This
second argument, however, has often been mounted in a somewhat confused way. At least three different reasons have been given for supposing
that it follows from the way in which a writer’s motives and intentions
stand ‘outside’ their works that they must be irrelevant to the activity of
interpretation. We need to begin by trying to disentangle them.
   One contention has been that motives and intentions are simply impossible to recover. ‘They are ‘private entities to which no one can gain
access’.*) ‘This is the first argument advanced by Wimsatt and Beardsley,
who rhetorically ask ‘how a critic expects to get an answer to the question about intention’, and respond that such an awareness of ‘design
or intention’ is simply not available.?° The same commitment underlies a nunaber of more recent contributions to the debate. We are told
that ‘intention is really unknowable’*’ and thus that literary critics and
intellectual historians find themselves confronting an ‘inevitable uncertainty about mental processes’.?® They will be deceiving themselves if
they suppose that they can ever ‘project themselves into the minds of
their authors’ in such a way as to recover the intentions with which they
wrote.*9
   A second contention has been that, while it may be possible to recover
such motives and intentions, to pay attention to such information will be
to furnish an undesirable standard for measuring the value ofa literary or
philosophical work. Wimsatt and Beardsley shift somewhat inconsistently
to this ground at the outset of their discussion, arguing that a knowledge
of a writer’s intentions is not ‘desirable as a standard for judging the
success of a work of literary art’.3° ‘The same commitment recurs in a
number of more recent presentations of the anti-intentionalist case. We
are told, for example, that ‘the problem is how far the author’s intention
in writing a work is relevant to the critic’s judgement on it’3'and we
are warned that a concern about intention may affect the response of a
reader in an undesirable way.?”
   A third contention has been that, while it may be possible to recover
a writer’s motives and intentions, it will never be relevant to pay attention
to this type of information if the aim is to establish the meaning of a text.
Wimsatt and Beardsley eventually shift to this further position, declaring
that their sole concern 1s with ‘the meaning of a poem’ and that the

25 See Aiken 1955, p- 752 for a discussion (but not an endorsement) of this argument.
26 Wimsatt and Beardsley 1976, pp. 1-2.        *7 Smith 1948, p. 625.      28 Gang 1957, p. 179.
°*9 Harlan 1989, p. 587.     3° Wimsatt and Beardsley 1976, pp. 1-2.       3! Gang 1957, p. 175.
3? Smith 1948, p. 625.

=== p. 114 ===

poet’s state of mind is a wholly separate matter.39 A similar commitment
has sometimes underpinned the phenomenological and, more generally,
the reader-response approach to the interpretation of texts. As we have
seen, a theorist like Ricoeur does not doubt that texts have ‘pristine’
and intended meanings; he merely regards their recovery as a matter of
secondary importance by contrast with the primary and more interesting
task of investigating the ‘public meanings’ they subsequently come to
acquire.

                                           IV

I am now in a position to ask whether any of the above arguments
succeeds in establishing, for any of the senses of ‘meaning’ I have discriminated, that the motives and intentions of writers can and ought to
be ignored in attempting to recover the meanings of their texts. The first
argument I considered — stemming from the desire to maintain purity in
our critical procedures — appears to rest on a confusion. It may be that a
knowledge ofa writer’s motives and intentions is irrelevant to elucidating
‘the meaning’ of their works in every sense of ‘meaning’ I have discriminated. But it does not follow that critics ought — or can hope — to ensure
that this knowledge plays no role in helping to determine their response
to that writer’s work. To know about motives and intentions is to know
the relationship in which a writer stands to what he or she has written.
To know about intentions 1s to know such facts as whether the writer was
joking or serious or ironic, or in general what speech acts they may have
been performing in writing what they wrote. To know about motives is
to know what prompted those particular speech acts, quite apart from
their character and truth-status as utterances. Now it may well be that to
know, say, that a certain writer was largely motivated by envy and resentment tells us nothing about ‘the meaning’ of their works. But once a critic
possesses such knowledge it can hardly fail to condition their response
to the work. ‘The discovery, say, that a work was written not out of envy
or resentment, but out of a simple desire to enlighten and amuse, seems
virtually certain to engender a new and different response to it. This may
or may not be desirable, but it seems to some degree inevitable.34
    I now turn to the various arguments derived from analysing the concepts of motive and intention themselves. The first — to the effect that
it is impossible to recover such mental acts — gains its plausibility from

33 Wimsatt and Beardsley 1976, pp. 6-9.   34 A point well brought out in Cioffi 1976, pp. 70-3.

=== p. 115 ===

ignoring the extent to which the intentions embodied in any successful
act of communication must, ex hypothest, be publicly legible. Suppose that
(to adapt an example from Wittgenstein) I come to understand that the
man waving his arms in the next field is not trying to chase away a fly, as
I had initially supposed, but is warning me that the bull is about to
charge. ‘To come to recognise that he is warning me is to come to
understand the intentions with which he is acting. But to recover these
intentions is not a matter of identifying the ideas inside his head at the
moment when he first begins to wave his arms. It is a matter of grasping
that arm-waving can count as warning, and that this is the convention
being exploited in this particular case. This makes it seriously misleading to characterise such intentions as ‘private entities to which no one
can gain a¢cess’.35 To the extent that the meanings of such episodes can
be intersubjectively understood, the intentions underlying such performances must be entities with an essentially public character. As Clifford
Geertz has finely remarked, ideas are ‘envehicled meanings’; pa are
not, and have not been for some time, unobservable mental stuff’.3
   I turn to the second argument, which seems to embody a misstatement.
It would clearly be a mistake to suppose that a knowledge of a writer’s
motives or intentions could ever supply a standard for judging the merit
or success of their work. As Frank Cioffi has remarked in a similar context,
it certainly will not do for a writer to assure a critic that he intended to
produce a masterpiece.%” ‘The third argument, by contrast, seems at least
partly correct. I shall concede, that is, that even if it may not be true in
the case of a writer’s intentions,it may well be true in the case of his or
her motives, that they may be said to stand ‘outside’ their works in such
a way that the recovery of such motives will be irrelevant — for all the
senses of ‘meaning’ I have discriminated — to an understanding of the
meaning of their works.
  This last claim rests, however, on a distinction between motives and
intentions which has not usually been made explicit in the debate about
the so-called intentional fallacy, but which my argument now requires
me to spell out. It has certainly been a striking and unsatisfactory feature
of the debate that, although most commentators have focused on intentionality, they have generally taken it for granted that everything they
say about intentions will hold good for motives as well.3° It seems to me,
however, that it is indispensable to distinguish motives from intentions

        35 Aiken 1955, p- 752-    3° Geertz 1980, p. 135.    37 Cioffi 1976, p. 57.
        38 A point well made in Morris Jones 1964, p. 143.

=== p. 116 ===

in relation to questions about interpretation, and I shall next attempt to
suggest how this distinction might most fruitfully be understood.*9
   To speak of a writer’s motives seems invariably to speak of a condition
antecedent to, and contingently connected with, the appearance oftheir
works. But to speak of a writer’s intentions may either be to refer to a
plan or design to create a certain type of work (an intention to do x)
or else to refer to an actual work in a certain way (as embodying a
particular intention in x-ing). In the former case we seem (as in talking
about motives) to be alluding to a contingent antecedent condition of
the appearance of the work. But in the latter we seem to be alluding to
a feature of the work itself. Specifically, we seem to be characterising it
in terms of its embodiment of a particular aim or intention, and thus in
terms of its having a particular purpose or point.
   We can conveniently corroborate this claim by borrowing the jargon
invented by philosophers of language to discuss the logical relations between the concepts of intention and meaning. They have concentrated
on the fact (following J. L. Austin’s classic analysis) that to issue any serious utterance is always to speak not only with a certain meaning but also
with what Austin dubbed a certain illocutionary force.4° When we issue
a meaningful utterance, we may succeed at the same time in performing
such illocutionary acts as promising, warning, entreating, informing and
so on. Austin’s usual way of putting the point was to say that gaining
‘uptake’ of the illocutionary force of an utterance will be equivalent to
understanding what the speaker was domg in issuing it.*' But another way
of putting the point — crucial to my present argument — would be to say
that an understanding of the illocutionary act performed by a speaker
will be equivalent to understanding their primary intentions in issuing
their utterance.
    I turn to the significance for my present argument of these distinctions
between motives and intentions, with the resulting isolation of the idea of
an intention 7m speaking or writing with a certain force. These distinctions,
it seems to me, lend strong support to the suggestion that the recovery of
motives 1s indeed irrelevant to the activity of interpreting the meanings
of texts. When we speak, that is, about a writer’s motives for writing
(although not their intentions i writing) we do indeed appear to be
speaking of factors standing ‘outside’ their work, and in a contingent

39 Tam indebted to Anscombe 1957 and Kenny 1963, two classic discussions in which the concepts
   of motive and intention are distinguished along similar lines. For a (partial) endorsement of my
   deployment of these distinctions see Hancher 1972, esp. pp. 836n. and 842—3n.
4° Austin 1980, pp. 98-108.      4° Austin 1980, p. 94 et passim.

=== p. 117 ===

relationship to it, in such a way that they can hardly be said to affect the
meaning of the work itself.
   If, however, we recall the other (and incompatible) claim usually made
by literary theorists about the concepts of motive and intention, it might
appear that I have already committed myself to saying that this conclusion holds good for the concept of intention as well. I have argued that
we may speak of a writer’s intentions in writing, and of these intentions as
being in some sense ‘inside’ their texts, rather than ‘outside’ and contingently connected with their appearance. According to the first argument
I cited, however, it is precisely because a writer’s intentions are ‘inside’
their texts that, we are told, the critic need pay no special attention to
their recovery in the attempt to interpret the meaning of their work.
    This contention, however, rests on conflating two different sorts of
question we might wish to ask about a writer’s intentions. It will be
convenient to revert to the jargon of the philosophers of language by
way of making the point. On the one hand, we may wish to ask about
the perlocutionary intentions embodied in a work.** We may wish, that
is, to consider whether it may have been intended to achieve a certain
effect or response such as (to take a well-worn example) that of inducing
in the reader a feeling of sadness.*3 But on the other hand we may wish,
as I have suggested, to ask about a writer’s ilocutionary intentions as
a means of characterising their work. We may wish, that is, to ask not
whether they achieved what they intended to achieve, but rather what
their exact intentions were im writing what they wrote.
    This brings me to my central contention about the relations between
a writer’s intentions and the meaning of a text. On the one hand, I shall
concede that a writer’s perlocutionary intentions (what they may have
intended 6y writing in a certain way) do not need to be further considered. They do not seem to need any separate study, since the question
of whether a work was intended by its author, say, to induce a feeling of sadness in the reader does seem to be capable of being settled
(if at all) only by considering the work itself and such clues about its intended effects as may be contained within it. On the other hand, I now
wish to argue that in the case of a writer’s illocutionary intentions (what
they may have intended z writing in a certain way) their recovery does
require a separate form of study, which it will be essential to undertake
if the critic’s aim is to understand the meaning of what they wrote.
42 For the introduction of the concept of perlocutionary effects see Austin 1980, pp. 99, 101-2.
43 Gang 1957, p. 177. Richards 1929, esp. pp. 180-3 appears to have been influential in directing
   attention towards these types of intentional effects.

=== p. 118 ===

   If this contention is to be made good, however, I now need to revert
to the three senses of ‘meaning’ I began by discriminating in order to
determine how the sense of intentionality I have now isolated may be
relevant to understanding ‘the meaning’ of a text.
   If we turn first to meaning,, it must be conceded that an understanding of a writer’s illocutionary intentions scarcely seems relevant to
understanding the meanings of texts in this sense. To say this is not to
take sides on the immense and immensely difficult question of whether
our statements about the meanings of words and sentences may not
ultimately be reducible to statements about someone’s intentions. It is only
to assert the truism that questions about the meanings of the words and
sentences I use cannot be equivalent to questions about my intentions in
using them.*#
   If we turn next to meaning,, it must again be conceded that an understanding of a writer’s intentions in writing scarcely seems relevant to this
sense of the meaning of a text. It seems clear, that is, that the question of
what a literary or philosophical work may mean to a given reader can be
settled quite independently of any considerations about what its creator
may have intended.
   If we turn to meaning,, however, it seems possible to establish the
closest possible connection between the intentions of writers and the
meanings of their texts. For it seems that a knowledge of a writer’s intentions in writing, in the sense I have sought to isolate, is not merely
relevant to, but equivalent to, a knowledge of the meaning, of what they
write. The stages by which I arrive at this conclusion will by now be clear.
To gain ‘uptake’ of these intentions 1s equivalent to understanding the
nature and range of the illocutionary acts that the writer may have been
performing in writing in a particular way. As I have suggested, to recover
such intentions is to be in a position to characterise what the writer was
doing ~ is to be able to say that he or she must have been intending, for
example, to attack or defend a particular line of argument, to criticise or
contribute to a particular tradition of discourse, and so on. But to be able
to characterise a work in such a way, in terms of its intended illocutionary
force, is equivalent to understanding what the writer may have meant by
writing in that particular way. It is equivalent, that is, to being able to say
that he or she must have meant the work as an attack on, or a defence of, as
a criticism of, or as a contribution to, some particular attitude or line of
argument, and so on. And so the equivalence between these intentions

               44 For a survey of these issues see Strawson 1971, pp. 170-89.

=== p. 119 ===

                       Motwes, intentions and interpretation                     101

in writing, and the meaning, of what is written, is established. For as
I have already indicated, to know what a writer meant by a particular
work zs to know what his or her primary intentions were in writing it.
   I wish finally to protect my thesis from two possible misinterpretations.
My argument must first be distinguished from the much stronger claim
often advanced to the effect that the recovery of these intentions, and
the decoding of the ‘original meaning’ intended by the writer, must form
the whole of the interpreter’s task.*5 It has often been suggested that ‘the
final criterion of correctness’ in interpretation can only be provided by
studying the original context in which the work was written.?° I have not
been concerned, however, to lend support to this very strong version of
what EF. W. Bateson called the discipline of contextual reading. I see no
impropriety in speaking of a work having a meaning which its author
could not have intended. Nor does my thesis conflict with this possibility.
I have been concerned only with the converse point: that whatever an
author was dog in writing what he or she wrote must be relevant to
interpretation, and thus that among the interpreter’s tasks must be the
recovery of the author’s intentions i writing what he or she wrote.
   This thesis must also be distinguished from the claim that, if we are
concerned with the intentions of authors in this way, we must be prepared
to accept whatever statements they make about their own intentions
as a kind of final authority on what they were doing in a particular
work. It is true that any agent is obviously in a privileged position when
characterising their own intentions and actions. But I see no difficulty
about reconciling the claim that we need to be able to characterise a
writer’s intentions if we are to interpret the meaning, of their works with
the claim that it may sometimes be appropriate to discount their own
accounts of what they were doing. This is not to say that we have lost
interest in understanding such intentions as a guide to interpreting their
works. It is only to say that a writer may not fully understand his or
her intentions, or may be self-deceiving about recognising them, or may
be incompetent at stating them. These are failures to which all flesh is
perpetually heir.
   But how are such illocutionary intentions to be recovered? I shall turn
to this further question in the course of chapter 6, but it may be worth
ending by gesturing at what I take to be the most crucial point. We need
to focus not merely on the particular text in which we are interested but
on the prevailing conventions governing the treatment of the issues or

          45 See, for example, Close 1972, pp. 36-8.   4° Bateson 1953, p. 16.

=== p. 120 ===

themes with which the text is concerned. ‘This injunction gains its force
from the consideration that any writer will normally be engaged in an
intended act of communication. It follows that whatever intentions a
writer may have, they must be conventional in the strong sense that they
must be recognisable as intentions to uphold some particular position
in argument, to contribute to the treatment of some particular topic,
and so on. It follows in turn that to understand what a writer may have
been doing in using some particular concept or argument, we need first
of all to grasp the nature and range of things that could recognisably
have been done by using that particular concept, in the treatment of that
particular theme, at that particular time. We need, in short, to be ready
to take as our province nothing less than the whole of what Cornelius
Castoriadis has described as the social imaginary, the complete range of
the inherited symbols and representations that constitute the subjectivity
of an age.*/

                      47 Castoriadis 1987, esp. pp. 353-73-

