=== chunk: skinner-2002-visions-of-politics-vol1/ch7-social-meaning ===
title: 'Social meaning' and the explanation of social action
source_pdf: docs/sources/skinner-2002-visions-of-politics-vol1/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 146-162
page_scheme: pdf
plan_page_start: 146
plan_page_end: 162
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 146 ===

      ‘Social meaning’ and the explanation of social action

                                                     I

A social action may be said to have a meaning for the agent performing
it. The acceptance of this rather vague claim represents the one major
point of agreement in the continuing debate between those philosophers
who assert and those who deny the naturalist thesis' to the effect that
social actions can sufficiently be accounted for by the ordinary processes
of causal explanation. The significance of the fact that actions have a
‘meaning’ has been emphasised in each of the three main traditions of
anti-naturalist opposition to the idea of a social science. ‘The followers
of Wilhelm Dilthey, and of the wider tradition concerned with the importance of Verstehen, stress that the distinctive feature of ‘the human
studies’ is their concern ‘with a world which has meaning for the actors involved’.? The phenomenologists likewise stress that the aim of the
social sciences must be to gain ‘insight into the meaning which social acts
have for those who act’.S And the followers of Wittgenstein argue that
the ‘forms of activity’ studied in the social sciences will characteristically
be those ‘of which we can sensibly say that they have a meaning’.
    This emphasis has been scarcely less marked in the various strands of
thought that have converged on accepting the theoretical possibility of
establishing a causal and predictive science of human behaviour. Those
who have sought to vindicate this approach continue to recognise the
need to take account of ‘the meaning of people’s movements’. Similarly,
those who maintain that even an agent’s reasons may be the causes of
their actions still allow for the fact that such agents will characteristically
    This chapter is an abbreviated and much revised version of an essay that originally appeared
    under the same title in Philosophy, Politics and Society, 4th series, ed. Peter Laslett, W. G. Runciman
    and Quentin Skinner (Oxford, 1972), pp. 136-57.
    Here and throughout I adopt the terminology proposed in Morgenbesser 1966, p. 255.
  Rickman 1967, p. 23.          3 Schutz 1960, p. 203.
4 Winch 1958, p. 45.         5 Gibson 1960, p. 52.

=== p. 147 ===

see ‘a point or meaning’ in their behaviour.® Even those who uphold the
strictest thesis of positivism — that actions must always be explained by
deducing their occurrence from some known empirical law covering such
movements — have continued to acknowledge that ‘what distinguishes a
mere bodily movement from an action’ is ‘the meaning of that movement’.’
   It is in fact possible, I shall next seek to show, to view the entire debate
between the social science naturalists and their adversaries in terms of the
different conclusions that the two sides have drawn from their common
stress on the fact that acting individuals (as Max Weber put it) normally
attach a ‘subjective meaning’ to their social behaviour.®
   The anti-naturalists trace a logical connection between the meaning
of q social action and the agent’s motives for performing it. They accordingly see’'the recovery of the agent’s motives as a matter of placing
their action within a context of social rules. This view of social meaning
has issued in two general conclusions about the explanation of social
action. One is that to decode the meaning of an action is equivalent
to giving a motive-explanation for the performance of it (thesis A). The
other is taken to be an implication of the fact that the recovery of an
agent’s motives is a matter of placing their action in a context of rules
rather than causes. It follows, we are told, that to cite the meaning and
motives of an action will be to provide a form of explanation that stands
in contrast with — and 1s in fact incompatible with — a causal explanation
of the same action (thesis B).
   These anti-naturalist conclusions have in part derived, and have
gained considerable strength, from the powerful impact of Wittgenstein’s
later philosophy on recent philosophical psychology. ‘This is perhaps
most evident in a work such as A. I. Melden’s Free Action. Melden lays his
main emphasis on the idea of ‘making sense’ of actions, and argues that
this is essentially a matter of recovering motives by way of understanding
the ‘background’ against which the agent acted. His principal conclusion is that this process makes causal explanation ‘wholly irrelevant to
the understanding’ of social behaviour.9
   There is a longer tradition of analysis lying behind this anti-naturalist
commitment. In the philosophy of history it is best represented by
R. G. Collingwood and the view of explanation he summarised in his /dea
ofHistory. To explain an action, Collingwood maintains, is always a matter of attempting ‘to discern the thoughts’ of the agent who performed it.

    ® Ayer 1967, p. 23-     7 Brodbeck 1963, p. 309.   8 Weber 1968, vol. 1, pp. 4, 8.
    9 Melden 1961, pp. 87-8, 102, 104, 184.

=== p. 148 ===

This in turn requires the historian to focus on questions of individual
motivation, and means that any historian who instead seeks to “emulate the scientist in searching for causes or laws’ is simply ‘ceasing to
be an historian’.'° The same contrast between understanding actions in
terms of motives and explaining events in terms of causes looks back
to Benedetto Croce as well as to Wilhelm Dilthey,"’ and forward to the
development of their arguments by William Dray, Alan Donagan and
others.”
   In the philosophy of social science a similar commitment has always
informed the Weberian tradition of analysis. Max Weber himself never
implied that the concepts of Verstehen and causal explanation are incompatible. But he opens his Wirtschaft und Gesellschafi by discussing motive-explanations, and at that juncture he equates the ‘understanding of
motivation’ with the business of ‘placing the act in an intelligible and
more inclusive context of meaning’.'? Since that time, a more strongly
anti-naturalist case has been developed by at least two schools of thought
that have acknowledged Weber’s influence. The phenomenologists (such
as Alfred Schutz, at least in certain moods) have gone on to insist that
understanding ‘the meaning which social phenomena have for us’ is a
matter of recovering ‘typical motives of typical actors’, and that this is a
form of understanding ‘peculiar to social things’.’t So too the disciples
of Wittgenstein such as Peter Winch. ‘They have insisted that ‘the notion
of meaningful behaviour is closely connected with notions like motive and
reason’. And they have inferred that the explanation of such behaviour, by
way of relating the agent’s motives to a context of social rules, requires
‘a scheme of concepts which is logically incompatible with the kinds of
explanation offered in the natural sciences’.
    The naturalists, by contrast, have given an account of social meaning
from which they have derived two conclusions strongly opposed to those
I have now set out. They first of all maintain that the decoding of the
meaning of a social action merely provides a way of redescribing it. But
since redescriptions cannot in themselves be explanatory, it must be a
mistake to suppose that the placing of a social action in its context, or
the decoding of its social meaning, can ever serve as an explanation of
the action concerned (thesis C). The second naturalist thesis is that, if

   Collingwood 194.6, pp. 214-15.
   For convenient extracts from Croce’s and Dilthey’s writings on these issues see Gardiner 1959,
   pp. 213-25 and pp. 226-41.
 * See Dray 1957, pp. 122-6 and cf. Donagan 1957.
 3 Weber 1968, vol. 1, p. 8.        “4 Schutz 1960, pp. 206, 211, 214.   S Winch 1958, pp. 45, 72-

=== p. 149 ===

the idea of decoding the meaning of an action is so much extended that
it becomes equivalent to recovering the agent’s motives, then there is no
incompatibility between social meaning and causality. This is because the
provision ofan explanation by way ofciting motives, or even intentions, is
itself'a form of causal explanation. The naturalists accordingly conclude
that there is nothing in the fact that social actions may be said to have a
meaning or to consist in the following of rules from which it follows that
such episodes may not be entirely explicable by the ordinary processes
of causal explanation (thesis D).
   These naturalist conclusions, like those of their opponents, have in
part derived from a recent movement in philosophical psychology. This
has taken the form ofa reaction against the Wittgensteinian assumption
that motives and intentions cannot function as causes. The critique of
this position has been sustained by some powerful arguments (best stated
by Donald Davidson)'"® and has prompted several philosophers (notably
Alasdair MacIntyre) to recant their earlier anti-naturalist views about the
explanation of action. The implications of the critique have been brought
out with particular clarity by A. J. Ayer in his essay ‘Man as a Subject for
Science’. On the one hand, Ayer insists that to redescribe a phenomenon
cannot be ‘in any way to account for it’. On the other hand, he argues that
to cite a motive or an intention to explain an action, as we do ‘in the normal way’, must ultimately be to point to ‘lawlike connections’ of a causal
form. Ayer concludes that, even if we can ‘estimate an action in terms of
its conforming to a rule’, and even if we need to understand such actions
‘in terms of their social contexts’, these factors affect the agent only as
‘part of his motivation’. They give us no grounds for doubting that the
action can be sufficiently explained ‘by means of a causal law’. So there is
‘nothing about human conduct that would entitle us to conclude a prori
that it was in any way less lawlike than any other sort ofnatural process’."7
   As with the anti-naturalists, there is a considerable tradition of analysis lying behind this line of thought. In the philosophy of history the
Idealism associated with Dilthey and Collingwood was always confronted
by a positivist tradition stemming from the philosophy of science. ‘The
latter outlook is perhaps best summarised by Carl Hempel in his classic
essay “The Function of General Laws in History’. ‘The attempt, Hempel
there claims, to explain the actions of historical individuals in an ad hoc

'© Davidson 1963.
7 Ayer 1967, pp. 16, 17, 21, 22~3. See also Mulligan, Richards and Graham 1979, p. 97 for the
   claim that, because all explanations must take the form of assigning causes, redescriptions cannot
   be explanatory.

=== p. 150 ===

manner, in terms of ‘the circumstances under which they acted, and
the motives which influenced their actions’, does not ‘in itself constitute
an explanation’. The fact that historians may concern themselves with
‘the “meanings” of given historical events’, as well as with motives and actions, does nothing to vitiate the claim that any satisfactory explanation
of an historical phenomenon must consist of ‘subsuming it under general
empirical laws’."®
   If we turn to the philosophy of social science we encounter an analogous point of view. The followers of Max Weber have always found
themselves confronted by the more strongly naturalist approach associated with Emile Durkheim and his disciples. Durkheim’s most powerful statement of his own commitment can be found in his Rules of
Sociological Method, in which we find him dismissing any need to study
individual intentions and motives in our efforts to explain social phenomena. Durkheim always insists that ‘the determining cause of a social
fact’ — under which heading he includes social action — ‘should be sought
among the social facts preceding it, and not among the states of individual consciousness’.'9
   My aim in what follows will be to reconsider these two opposed theoretical traditions by seeking to do three things. I shall first attempt
(section IT) to make a new start on analysing what might be involved in
speaking about the ‘meanings’ of actions. I shall then try (section I)
to show that, if my analysis is sound, there would seem to be grounds
for doubting each of the four theses I have now set out. Finally, I shall
go on to suggest (section IV) some methodological implications of my
argument for historians and social scientists, at least in so far as they are
concerned with the explanation of action.

                                            II

There is a tendency, particularly among anti-naturalists, to apply the
concept of social meaning in an over-extended way. (This is perhaps
evident from several of the quotations I have already given.) I shall begin, therefore, by restricting myself to considering the way in which the
concept is used in the discussion of a single class of social actions. Later
I shall try tentatively to extend the application of this analysis. But I shall
first concentrate on the class in which the idea of meaning something

                ‘8 Hempel 1942, PP: 44-5.        "9 Durkheim 1964, p. 110.

=== p. 151 ===

                  ‘Social meaning’ and the explanation of social action                     i233
in or by doing something has its clearest and most obvious application,
namely in the class oflinguistic actions.
   I have already spoken in chapter 6 about the concept of linguistic
action andJ. L. Austin’s classic exposition of it in How to Do Things with
Words. Here I need only recall Austin’s central contention to the effect
that anyone issuing a serious utterance will always be doing something
as well as saying something, and will be doing something im saying what
he or she says, not merely as a consequence of what is said. As we have
seen, Austin reached this conclusion by way of claiming that to issue any
serious utterance is always to speak not only with a certain meaning but
also with what he called a certain illocutionary force. Austin’s pivotal
contention was that to understand this element of illocutionary force
co-ordinate with the ordinary meaning of a locution is equivalent to
understanding what the speaker was doing in issuing their utterance.
   Expounding this analysis in chapter 6, I offered a simple example as
an aid to clarifying the sense in which the issuing of a serious utterance
may be said to constitute the performance ofa social action. A policeman
sees a skater on a pond and calls out: “The ice over there is very thin.””°
The policeman says something and the words mean something. But
Austin’s further point is that the utterance also has a certain intended
illocutionary force, corresponding to the fact that the policeman will also
have been doing something in issuing his utterance. He may, for example,
have been performing the illocutionary act of warning the skater.
   I now wish to suggest that this account of linguistic action may be used
to establish two crucial points about the sense of ‘meaning’ with which
we are concerned in examining the meaning of social actions. The first
is that the decoding of the meaning of an action seems equivalent, in
the case of linguistic action, to understanding the nature of the illocutionary act performed by the speaker. ‘To understand, for example, that
the policeman was performing the act of warning seems equivalent to
understanding the meaning of the act of issuing his utterance. ‘To invoke
H. P. Grice’s helpful formula, it is to understand what the policeman
(non-naturally) meant by acting in this way.*
   Grice introduced the concept of non-natural meaning in order to draw
a contrast with the natural meaning of signs, and thus with the contrasting
2° As noted in chapter 6, I am here adapting an example originally put forward in Strawson 1971,
   p. 153. Here I need to add that I also follow Strawson in extending J. L. Austin’s concept ofa
   convention and in relating H. P. Grice’s theory of meaning to Austin’s account of illocutionary
   acts. For a defence of these commitments see Skinner 1970.
21 See Grice 1957 and the revisions in Grice 1969.

=== p. 152 ===

sense of ‘meaning’ that seems to be in play when we say things like ‘those
spots mean measles’.”* My second point is that to ask about this non-natural sense of meaning, at least in the case oflinguistic actions, seems
equivalent to asking about the agent’s intentions in performing their
action. It is perhaps necessary to be more precise, and to stress that to
ask this question is to ask about their primary intention. It is arguable that
Austin’s way of stating his theory encouraged the belief that for every
action there must be a single intention underlying it. But we often have
several different intentions in performing a single action. Some may be
less important than others from the point of view of characterising what
we are doing, but all of them may nevertheless form part of the complex of
intentions realised in the act. It remains true, however, that to understand
that what the policeman meant to do, in issuing his utterance, was fo warn
the skater is equivalent to understanding the primary intention with which
the policeman acted.
   It might be doubted whether this analysis of ‘social meaning’ can
usefully be extended to non-linguistic cases. My response is to appeal
to authority — or rather, to a series of relevant authorities. Suppose we
endorse Austin’s own claim — which seems to me unquestionable — that
certain illocutionary acts are invariably performed non-verbally.*s ‘Then
there is good reason to suppose that my analysis can at least be used to
decode the meaning of the ‘ritual and ceremonial’ acts in which Austin
was chiefly interested. Suppose in addition we accept P. F. Strawson’s
contention — for which he offered strong arguments** — that the account
given by Austin of the conventions of illocutionary force was unduly
narrow in scope. Then there is good reason to believe that the analysis
can also be used to decode the meaning of a whole range of non-ritual
as well as non-linguistic actions. Finally, it is relevant to recall that the
main aim of H. P. Grice’s original discussion of non-natural meaning
was ‘to show that the criteria for judging linguistic intentions are very
like the criteria for judging non-linguistic intentions’, and thus to show
‘that linguistic intentions are very like non-linguistic intentions’.*9
   These suggestions may be corroborated by considering some examples
of non-linguistic action. Consider first a case of a ritual but non-linguistic
action. (Martin Hollis has popularised the following example.) Certain
Yoruba tribesmen ‘carry about with them boxes covered with cowrie

22 Grice 1957, p. 377.    *3 Austin 1980, pp. 19, 119.
“* See Strawson 1971, pp. 149-69 and my own attempt to extend and apply his analysis in Skinner
   1970.
79 Grice 1957, p. 388.

=== p. 153 ===

shells, which they treat with special regard’.2° My interest lies in the
meaning ofthe action and the questions we need to answer in order to
decode it. The crucial question certainly seems to be about what the
tribesmen are doing in performing this action. The answer (Hollis tells us)
is that they believe ‘that the boxes are their heads or souls’ and that what
they are doing in treating the boxes with reverence is protecting their
souls against witchcraft. This in turn suggests that to ask and answer this
question about the illocutionary force of the tribesmen’s behaviour is,
as I have suggested, equivalent to asking about their intentions in acting in this way. Notice that we do not learn the motive that prompted
(and perhaps caused) them to treat their boxes with special regard, although we may now infer that it is likely to have been respect or fear for
the power'of unknown forces. What we learn is their primary intention
in acting, their intention being to protect their souls.
    Consider next a case of a non-ritual, non-linguistic action. (I derive
the example from one of the case-histories reported by R. D. Laing and
A. Esterson in Sanity, Madness and the Family.)?7 An adolescent girl becomes
an apparently compulsive reader, ‘burying herself in her books’ and refusing to stop or allow herself to be interrupted. Laing and Esterson’s
interest in the case lies primarily in their suggestion that the behaviour
can be seen as a strategy, a deliberate action rather than a symptom of
illness. My related interest is in the meaning of the behaviour, and in
the appropriate question to ask in order to determine whether it has
any meaning, and if so how it should be decoded. The crucial question
again seems to be about what the girl is domg in performing this action.
Laing and Esterson’s answer 1s that she is ‘taking refuge’ and preventing
what she takes to be intrusions by an overdemanding family. As before,
moreover, it seems that to ask and answer this question about the illocutionary force of the action is equivalent to asking about the girl’s
intentions in acting in this way. Notice again that this does not tell us the
motives that prompted (and perhaps caused) the girl’s behaviour. Laing
and Esterson suggest that her motive may have been a desire for what
they call ‘autonomy’ but one might infer other motives as well — perhaps
a kind of pride, perhaps an element of resentment. What we learn is
the girl’s primary intention in acting, the intention to register a protest
against, and to protect herself from, an excessively demanding situation.
   It may still seem, however, that to extend the discussion to include such
non-linguistic actions is to give an illegitimate application to Austin’s

           26 Hollis 1996, p. 199.   *7 Laing and Esterson 1970, pp. 34-5, 46.

=== p. 154 ===

and Grice’s theories. Consider finally, therefore, a further case of a
(non-ritual) linguistic action, and one of some historical importance.
Niccolé Machiavelli, in chapter 15 of // Principe, enunciates the following
rule: ‘it is necessary for a prince to learn how not to be good’.?® A large
number of commentators have asked what exactly he may have meant
by offering this advice. Here it cannot I think be doubted that the crucial
question to raise is what Machiavelli was doing in counselling rulers in this
way. One widely accepted answer (originally put forward by Felix Gilbert)
has been that Machiavelli was ‘consciously refuting his predecessors’
within the highly conventionalised genre of advice-books to princes.*9
Again it seems unquestionable that to ask and answer this question about
the illocutionary force of Machiavelli’s utterance is equivalent to asking
about his intentions in saying what he said. Notice once more that this
does not tell us the motives which prompted (and perhaps caused) him
to offer his advice. Gilbert suggests that the most likely motives may have
been a mixture of frustration at the prevailing ‘idealist interpretation of
politics’, combined with a simple desire to shock and a belief in the importance of saying something genuinely useful.3° The point once more is that
what we learn is Machiavelli’s primary intention in writing what he wrote.
I do not wish to imply here, of course, that what we learn is the intention
lying behind the writing of the particular sentence I have quoted, nor do
I wish to imply that Machiavelli need have had any isolable intention in
writing just that sentence. My claim is simply that we learn the intention
lying behind Machiavelli’s argument at this stage of his work, the intention being to challenge and repudiate an accepted moral commonplace.

                                                Ill

I now turn to try to bring out the philosophical interest of my argument.
This lies, as I have already hinted, in the suggestion that the argument I
have now set out gives grounds for saying that the theses of the naturalists
(CG and D) as well as those of the anti-naturalists (A and B) may be
mistaken. Consider first the two naturalist theses. Thesis C states that
to redescribe an action is in no way to explain it. I have now sought
to show, however, that for at least some actions there can be a unique
form of redescription which, by way of recovering the agent’s intended
illocutionary act, may be capable of explaining at least certain features
of their behaviour. This conclusion can be corroborated by reverting to
28 Machiavelli 1960, p. 65: ‘é necessario a uno principe. . . imparare a potere essere non buono’.
79 Gilbert 1977, p. 110.     3° Gilbert 1977, pp. 111-12.

=== p. 155 ===

the example of the policeman saying ‘The ice over there is very thin.’
This episode might be witnessed by some puzzled bystanders who fail
to grasp the policeman’s primary intention in issuing his utterance. One
request for an explanation might take the form of asking ‘Why did he
say that?’ One reply might be ‘He said it to warn the skater.’ There
seems no doubt, moreover, about the way in which such illocutionary
redescriptions serve as explanations. It is one thing if the bystanders
understand what the policeman’s utterance to the skater means, so that
they can give an account of what the policeman said. But it is another
and further thing if they understand what the policeman’s act of issuing
an utterance with that meaning was itself intended to mean on the given
occasion, so that they can give an account of why the policeman said what
he said. Colloquially, we may say that what an illocutionary redescription
will characteristically explain about a social action will be its point.
   Critics have objected that the redescription only provides additional
information about what the policeman was doing, not why he was doing
it.’ It is true that what the redescription serves to explain is not the
occurrence of the policeman’s action but the character of his utterance.°?
Nevertheless, my thesis about the explanation of action stands. To return
to my imagined bystanders: as I have argued, one natural source of
their puzzlement might stem from a failure to grasp the point of the
policeman’s utterance. To inform them that it was meant as a warning
will remove their puzzlement. But to say that a sense of puzzlement about
a state of affairs has been removed is to say that an explanation has been
provided.
   Consider next thesis D, which states that there is nothing in the fact
that an action may have a meaning from which it follows that it may not
be entirely explicable by the ordinary processes of causal explanation.
I have now suggested that, while it may be essential in a wide range of
cases to recover the meaning of an action in order to explain it, to supply this redescriptive form of explanation is to supply something other
than a causal explanation. This can also be corroborated by reverting
to my example of the policeman warning the skater. ‘The explanation of
the action is supplied by way of recovering what the policeman meant,
in the non-natural sense of understanding not just what his utterance
meant, but what his act of issuing that utterance meant in the circumstances. This is supplied by way of decoding the conventions governing
the illocutionary force attaching to the utterance. But this can scarcely
         3! See, for example, Graham 1988, p. 154; Hollis 1988, pp. 139, 141, 146.
         32 Freundlieb 1980, p. 436.

=== p. 156 ===

be to provide a causal explanation. For this is to focus on a feature of
the policeman’s action, not on an independently specifiable condition in
the way that causal explanation requires.
   Next consider the two anti-naturalist theses. Thesis A states that the
reason why the concept of social meaning can be explanatory is because
it tells us an agent’s motives for acting. Drawing on my argument in
chapter 5, however, I have now sought to show, first, that a sharp line
needs to be drawn between motives and intentions in acting, and secondly
that it is intentions, not motives, that we need to recover if we are to
decode the meaning ofsocial actions.
    The need for this division does not seem to have been admitted by any
of the philosophers I have quoted. The anti-naturalists (such as Melden,
Rickman and Winch)3 as well as the naturalists (such as Ayer, Davidson
and MacIntyre)34 write about motives and intentions in this connection —
and often about reasons and purposes as well — as if they believe these
terms to be virtually interchangeable. ‘This seems a mistake in itself, but
it also seems of some consequence when we try to explain social actions,
since it encourages the elision of what I take to be a necessary stage in
the process of explanation. ‘The stage in question is the one at which
it may be appropriate, before asking about someone’s motives, or any
deeper causes of their behaviour, to ask whether the performance oftheir
action itself bears any conventional element of (non-natural) meaning or
(illocutionary) force.
   The significance of isolating this extra stage can be illustrated by examining the main instance of a social action offered by Ayer in his essay
‘Manas a Subject for Science’. Ayer takes the case of someone drinking a
glass of wine, and claims that this action might be explained, according
to its context, either as ‘[1] an act of self-indulgence, [2] an expression
of politeness, [3] a proof of alcoholism, [4] a manifestation of loyalty,
[5] a gesture of despair, [6] an attempt at suicide, [7] the performance of
a social rite, [8] a religious communication, |g] an attempt to summon
up one’s courage, [10] an attempt to seduce or corrupt another person,
[11] the sealing of a bargain, [12] a display of professional expertise,
[13] a piece of inadvertence, [14] an act of expiation, [15] the response
to a challenge’.%9
   It is true that my argument is not altogether easy to make good in
terms of Ayer’s elaborate and eccentric list. In cases [3] and [13] it is
         33 Melden 1961, pp. 83-9; Rickman 1967, p. 69; Winch 1958, pp. 45-51.
         34 Davidson 1963, p. 699; Ayer 1967, p. 9; MacIntyre 1971, p. 226.
         35 Ayer 1967, pp. 9-10. Ihave added the numbers for ease of reference.

=== p. 157 ===

not clear that the explicans yields the explanation of anything that could
be called a voluntary action. In cases [6], [10] and [12] it is not clear
how the explicans is even to be understood. It is hard to see, that is, how
any of these answers could be offered as possible explanations for the
action simply of drinking a glass of wine. Furthermore, in cases [1], [5],
[9] and [14] it is not clear that there is any separate question to ask
about the meaning ofthe action. This still leaves us, however, with cases
 [2], [4], [7]. [8]. [11], and perhaps [15]. The explanation in these cases,
pace Ayer’s conflation of intentions and motives, seems to take the form
ofa redescription that directs us not primarily to the agent’s motives, but
rather to their intentions in drinking the glass of wine. Here it does seem
necessary to begin by considering a stage of explanation prior to any
attempt to elucidate the agent’s motives. The stage in question is the one
at which we attempt to recover the unique illocutionary redescription
in terms of which the agent’s performance of the action can be shown
non-naturally to mean something. We might say, for example, in case
 [4] that what the agent was doing in drinking the glass of wine was
confirming a bond ofloyalty, or in case [11] that what they were doing was
sealing a bargain. So it seems that the anti-naturalists must be mistaken
when they equate the recovery of social meaning with the elucidation of
motives.
   Consider finally thesis B, which states that to account for an action
by citing its meaning and the agent’s motives is to provide a form of explanation incompatible with causality. This thesis is contradicted rather
than sustained by the way in which I have sought to vindicate the possibility of giving non-causal explanations of action. I have sought to argue
only that to explain an action in terms of the agent’s intentions in performing it constitutes one stage in accounting for a certain range of
social behaviour. I have not suggested that to provide such non-causal
explanations is incompatible with the subsequent provision of further
and arguably causal explanations of the same action. One such further stage might be to provide an explanation in terms of motives. A
yet further stage might be to provide an explanation in terms of the
grounds for the agent’s possession of just those motives. It will normally
be indispensable to move on to these further stages in order to provide
anything like a complete explanation. And I should wish to claim that
it is strongly arguable in the case of the first stage, and unquestionable
in the case of the second, that to provide these further explanations
will be to provide causal explanations for the performance of the action
concerned.

=== p. 158 ===

14.0                        Visions of Politics: Regarding Method
                                                  IV

I turn finally to consider the practical implications of the thesis I have
defended. For at least two reasons it seems to me of special interest to
try to make this point. One is that there has been a tendency among
philosophers of social science to deny that their views about the logic of
explanation entail any methodological recommendations.2° The other is
that there has been a broader tendency among historians as well as social
scientists to deny that the acceptance of any particular philosophical
viewpoint has any bearing on the conduct of their disciplines. I now
wish to suggest that, if the conceptual scheme I have set out is sound, it
entails at least three methodological recommendations, all of which tend
to be ignored or even repudiated in a good deal of current writing in
history and social science. I concede, of course, the difficulty of deriving
anything except negative methodological injunctions from my a priori
arguments. I hope nevertheless that it may be possible to see in this
section the beginnings ofan answer to those who have refused to accept
that the dispute over causal and rational explanation could have anything
to do with the practice of the social sciences.
   Consider first the classes (the non-linguistic as well as linguistic classes)
of what Austin called ‘ritual and ceremonial’ actions. There are two
methodological injunctions that seem, at least in these cases, to follow from the argument I have advanced. The first is that we need to
raise questions about ritual beliefs in order to explain such actions. This
suggestion has been rejected by a number of anthropologists,?” and is
certainly bypassed by those who have written as if they believe that ritual actions can sufficiently be explained in terms of their place in a
social structure or by reference to their effects.3° It is clear, however,
that there is a link between the range of intentions it makes sense to
ascribe to people and the nature of their beliefs. It follows that, in order to explain a ritual action by way of recovering the agent’s intentions in performing it, we must be prepared to examine and refer to
the ritual beliefs informing the intentions with which ritual actions are
performed.
   My second recommendation is that, as soon as we recognise the need
to recover such beliefs, we need to raise questions about their rationality.
A certain caution is admittedly required in developing this point. A clear

3° See, for example, Winch 1964, p. 203.
37 Jarvie and Agassi 1970, p. 179 go so far as to speak of the ‘general criticism’ in social anthropology
   of ‘the entire assumption that people’s actions can be explained by their beliefs’.
38 Hollis 1970b, pp. 225~7 examines and criticises such explanations.

=== p. 159 ===

danger of conceptual imperialism lurks in the supposition that we can
speak tout court of holding a rational belief as a matter of showing an
adequate willingness to consider whether there is ‘sufficient evidence
in its favour’, if it is ‘based on good evidence’, and so on.39 We need to
reckon with the fact that the question of what counts as good or sufficient
evidence can never be free from cultural reference.
   This objection has oflate been increasingly voiced, especially by such
followers of Wittgenstein as Peter Winch, and more recently by Richard
Rorty and others.*° They have insisted that, if we employ the concept
of rationality to criticise our beliefs, we shall merely contaminate                       our
social explanations with our own local standards of rationality. The objection has been developed as follows. We can readily imagine an alien
system of beliefs in which the paradigms used to connect the system
together are such that none of the evidence we should regard as evidence in favour of abandoning particular beliefs is held to count as
decisive evidence for or against them. We can then imagine someone
operating within the system who accepts these paradigms and canons
of evidence, recognises and follows only the moves accepted as rational
within the system, but never challenges the rationality of the system itself.
We can hardly fail to concede that such people hold their beliefs in a
rational way. But in that case the notion of employing the concept of
rationality as a tool for the criticism of beliefs appears to lose any cutting
edge.
   This argument appears to me to embody a non sequitur. I have already
given my reasons for this conclusion in chapter 3, but it may be worth
reiterating my basic point. We can accept that what it means for someone
to hold a rational belief is merely for the belief in question to be a suitable
one to hold true in the circumstances in which they find themselves. But
we can still apply the concept of rationality in the criticism of such an
agent’s beliefs. For it remains to be asked whether they held the belief
in the light of, rather than in the face of, the criteria locally accepted as
appropriate for the formation and testing of beliefs.
   Why does this response matter for the purposes of my present argument? Because rational and irrational beliefs generate correspondingly
different actions. In the first case, the investigator needs to find means to
establish that the agent’s beliefs were in fact rationally held, especially if
they strike the investigator as obviously false. In the second case, a further
and different type of investigation will be required if the agent’s actions
are to be explained. The investigator needs to discover why the agent
     39 Gibson 1960, p. 156.   4° Winch 1970, pp. 97-103; Rorty 1979, esp. pp. 174, 331.

=== p. 160 ===

continued to hold onto an unsuitable belief when the means to improve
it were available. Unless the investigator is prepared to raise such questions, it may not be possible to identify what stands to be explained about
the agent’s beliefs and any actions undertaken in the light of them.
  T turn lastly to consider the wider class of social actions which, I have
suggested, can in part be explained by decoding the agent's (illocutionary)
intentions in performing them. I wish to suggest that in these cases a
further injunction follows from my general argument. ‘The injunction 1s
to think holistically, and thus to begin by focusing not on the individual
action to be explained, but rather on the conventions surrounding the
performance of such actions in the relevant social context.1' The sense
of grasping what is conventional is not limited to the case in which we
speak of understanding that an action has been performed according to
a convention that has self-consciously been followed. The relevant sense
includes the wider notion of understanding the established assumptions
and expectations of a given culture. We need to begin not by trying to
recover the agent’s motives by studying the context of social rules, but
rather by trying to decode their intentions by situating their action within
this larger structure of values and practices.
   This injunction appears to hold good even in the case of the type of
abnormal behaviour I have mentioned — such as the example from Laing
and Esterson’s work on schizophrenia. ‘The question is what approach
we should follow in attempting to discover whether the apparent autism
of an allegedly schizophrenic adolescent may not be a case of deliberate
and meaningful behaviour. The suggested answer 1s that we ought not to
begin by making an intensive study of the particular case and its possible
aetiology. We ought rather to begin by trying to relate the particular
case to other instances of adolescent withdrawal. ‘The aim will be to
try to assess the extent to which the seeming autism may not represent a
conventional form and degree of protest, rather than a set of pathological
symptoms awaiting a straightforward causal explanation.
    The same injunction applies even more clearly to the types of linguistic
action I have mentioned. Consider again the passage I quoted from
Machiavelli’s // Principe. Here there is not only a highly conventionalised
genre of writing against which to measure Machiavelli’s utterance. There
is also a clear presumption that Machiavelli was aware of the genre and
the conventions governing it. It seems unquestionable in this case that
the appropriate route to follow, in attempting to recover what he meant,

                  4" But for a criticism of this proposal see Mew 1971.

=== p. 161 ===

will be to begin not by making an intensive study of his text itself, but
rather by trying to see what relations it bore to these existing conventions
of discourse.
   It is true that this injunction has been explicitly repudiated by those
historians who have wished to insist that it must be possible, simply by
reading such works ‘over and over’, to arrive at a sufficient understanding
of them.?* But it is surely clear (to keep to the Machiavelli example) that
the fact that // Principe was in part intended as an attack on the morality
embodied in humanist advice-books to princes cannot be discovered by
attending to Machiavelli’s text, since this is not a fact contained in the text.
It is also clear that no one can be said fully to understand Machiavelli’s
text who does not understand this cardinal fact about it. To fail to grasp
this fact is to fail to grasp the point of Machiavelli's argument in the
central chapters of his book. It seems, then, that some other form of
study besides that of reading such texts ‘over and over’ is indispensable
to understanding them. And it seems that this will need to take the form
of adding a study of the general conventions and assumptions of the
genre, from which the intentions of any particular contributor to it may
then — by a combination of inference and scholarship — be decoded.

                                                 Vv

It will be clear by now that my thesis occupies a middle ground which
has I believe been generally overlooked in recent philosophical debates
about the explanation of action. I have not been particularly concerned
with exegesis, but I believe that my position is similar to the one taken
up — though by a different route — by Max Weber in his Wirtschaft und
Gesellschaft. Those who have emphasised (correctly, I believe) the importance of intentions and conventions in the explanation of action have
usually written as though it follows that the attempt to explain such actions causally must represent a confusion, even a ‘pernicious confusion’;
that it must in any case be ‘wholly irrelevant’; and that the whole vocabulary of causality ought accordingly to be ‘expunged’ from discussions
about the explanation of social action.*? Conversely, those who have insisted (again correctly, I believe) on the absurdity of this commitment
have usually written as though it follows that intentions and conventions
must themselves be treated as causal conditions of actions.44 What I have
4? Plamenatz 1963, vol. 1, p. x.
43 For these claims see respectively Louch 1966, p. 238; Melden 1961, p. 184; Abelson 1965, p. 541.
44 See, for example, Davidson 1963, p. 699; Ayer 1967, p. 9.

=== p. 162 ===

sought to argue is that neither of these alleged implications follows, and
that both of them appear to be mistaken.
   It might finally be asked what relation these conclusions bear to the issue of determinism with respect to voluntary human action. This would
be a vertiginous question even to broach, were it not that several proponents of the naturalist theses I have examined have suggested that
they lend immediate strength to the thesis of determinism. This belief
emerges, for example, at the end of A. J. Ayer’s essay ‘Man as a Subject
for Science’. Ayer first recalls that we ordinarily explain human actions
by citing the motives and intentions of agents and the social context of
their behaviour. He then argues that all these conditions must be construed as causes of which their actions are effects. From this he concludes
that there is ‘no reason why the reign of law should break down’ when we
come to explain such actions. This is ‘the strength of the determinists’.4
   I have sought to argue, however, that although there can undoubtedly
be successful causal explanations of voluntary human actions, there can
also be successful explanations of such actions which are neither causal
nor reducible to a causal form. If this argument is sound, it seems possible
to suggest two conclusions about the relations between the naturalist
theses I have examined and the idea of the social determinism of actions,
without having to commit oneself on the vexed question of the meaning
of the thesis of determinism itself. The first is that, if it is essential for
the defence of the thesis of social determinism that all the mental states
of agents should be construed as causes of their actions, then there may
be something inherently doubtful about the thesis itself. But the main
conclusion, which can I think be expressed more confidently, is that
insofar as current arguments in favour of the thesis of social determinism
depend upon the truth of thesis C and thesis D, the thesis of social
determinism has not been strengthened at all.

                               45 Ayer 1967, p. 24.

