=== chunk: booth-sutton-2022-systematic-approaches/ch6-assessing-evidence ===
title: Assessing the Evidence Base (quality, validity, hierarchies)
source_pdf: docs/sources/booth-sutton-2022-systematic-approaches/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 193-228
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 158
plan_page_end: 193
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 158 ===

   ASSESSING THE EVIDENCE
           BASE

                 in a nutshell

Selecting studies to include in your review and assessing their quality
• Different roles and challenges are associated with assessing the evidence base for quality
  and relevance.
• You must be able to assess studies for relevance and select studies to include in your literature review.
• Key concepts in quality assessment relate to validity and reliability; this chapter explores
  their importance within literature reviews.
• Other important concepts include applicability, transferability or generalisability.
• Identifying appropriate quality assessment resources, undertaking quality assessment and
  presenting the results of quality assessments are the key challenges of the quality assessment process.

                  key terms explained

   external validity: the extent to which you can reasonably apply the results of a study to
   a definable population in a particular setting in day-to-day practice. Often described as
   applicability.

   internal validity: the extent to which the design of a study demonstrates precautions that
   have been taken to avoid systematic errors or bias.

=== p. 159 ===

      quality assessment: evaluation of the methodological quality of a research design within
      a study report to assess the extent to which the design and conduct of that study might
      impact on the credibility of the research findings.

      quality assessment checklist: a tool used to perform a transparent and explicit evaluation of the methodological quality of a research design, using items, criteria or prompts.

      subgroup analysis: analytical technique that involves dividing studies into subgroups
      according to a particular study design feature that might impact on study findings, for
      example the country in which the study was undertaken, or studies with large and small
      sample sizes, and exploring how these features might impact on the findings of the review.

      Sensitivity analysis: a subgroup analysis to examine whether the results change if poor-quality studies are omitted.

INTRODUCTION
Assessing the evidence base is the point in the review process that focuses on the particular
value that individual studies hold for your review question and the practical application of
research. After searching the literature (Chapter 5), you will have identified a potential evidence
base for your review, which often can be large and diffuse. From this list of references, you need
to select systematically those that are relevant for your review question and exclude those that
are not relevant. Once you have finalised your list of included studies for your literature review,
you need to plan how to assess the evidence base. How exactly you will assess your included
studies depends on the type of review being undertaken (see Chapter 3). Assessing the evidence base might simply involve briefly characterising the literature, for example in a mapping
review. Alternatively, assessment might extend to a detailed examination of the methods and
conduct of each study included in a systematic review. Within this overall assessment process
this detailed examination is known as ‘critical appraisal or quality assessment’.
  ‘Critical appraisal’ or ‘quality assessment’ are often used synonymously. Essentially, critical
appraisal or quality assessment both focus on ‘whether we can believe a study’, and this
is often referred to as internal validity. We tend to privilege the term ‘critical appraisal’ when
referring to the assessment of a single study, perhaps with a view to applying it directly within
professional practice. We prefer ‘quality assessment’ when referring to the procedure that examines numerous studies in a standardised way as part of a systematic review or evidence synthesis.
  Systematic reviews carry out quality assessment as a standard procedure, and extensive
multidisciplinary guidance exists on how to do this (Billotta et al., 2014; Higgins et al., 2021).
We also need to assess generalisability or applicability, also known as external validity.
Often this process is considered alongside quality assessment, but its focus is slightly different. Put simply, we assess the generalisability or applicability of an individual study by asking, ‘Is the study relevant to the population targeted by our review question?’. Typically issues
concerning internal validity are presented in the Results section of a review, while external
validity is considered in the Discussion/Recommendations/Conclusion (see Chapter 10 for
how to write up your review); however, many reviewers prefer to assess both in a single process,
alongside data extraction (see Chapter 7).
  This chapter discusses how to assess the evidence base, while focusing on quality assessment
procedures (we will use this term throughout this chapter). The chapter starts by discussing how

=== p. 160 ===

to select relevant studies for a literature review in a systematic way. Then the chapter considers
how to start to assess the evidence base and how the effort spent on assessment depends on
the function of, and type of, literature review. The next section introduces the need for quality
assessment. The section also outlines the different properties that you might assess in studies
included in your review: validity, reliability and generalisability/applicability. Next, we provide
an overview of different study designs, focusing on the implications of study design features.
This is followed by a section on conducting your quality and relevance assessment, including presenting results and challenges of the process. The chapter details tools for assessing the
evidence base. Throughout the chapter, we refer to examples from within different disciplines;
however, you can consider how each section applies to your own review topic.

HOW TO ASSESS THE RELEVANCE OF STUDIES TO
YOUR REVIEW QUESTION
At this stage, you have completed your literature search (Chapter 5), and as a result you have
a list of potential studies for your literature review. From this ‘long list’ you need to select, for
inclusion in your review, those studies that are relevant to the review question you formulated
in Chapter 4. In some instances, depending on the quantity of research in your topic area, this
can be a very long list of studies. At this point, you may feel overloaded with information!
  Being systematic when selecting studies from the results of your literature search allows you
to exclude studies that are not relevant to your review while ensuring that you do not miss studies that are relevant. This is important to help reduce selection bias within the review – the
review findings should be based upon all relevant studies. It is essential that you have a clear
idea of what is relevant to your review. Chapter 4 discussed formulating explicit inclusion criteria and exclusion criteria. It is at this stage where, if you devised an appropriately focused
review question, you will find that selecting studies is made much easier. You look at your inclusion and exclusion criteria and assess how each potentially relevant study identified from the
literature fulfils each criterion in turn. If a study does not fulfil a specific inclusion criterion or if
it meets any of the exclusion criteria, you should not include that study in your review.
  Looking forward to your review write-up, it is essential to keep a good audit trail of which references you have included and excluded, along with reasons for study exclusion. For references
excluded when assessing titles and abstracts you should identify the main reason for exclusion at this stage, likely linked to your PICO criteria. You only need to document one reason
when excluding any reference at the title and abstract stage (e.g. inappropriate population etc.).
Systematic review software allows you to record that decision quickly and easily.
  Documenting your decisions on inclusion and exclusion are equally important at the full text
stage. Again, there may be multiple reasons why a specific paper might be excluded but you will
only need to document one of these to justify your decision. Again software allows you to select
a reason for exclusion from a list that you have pre-specified. Usually, for practical reasons, you
will choose the most immediately apparent reason for exclusion; however, in some cases you
may want to emphasise the impact of a particular criterion. For example, if you are only including randomised controlled trials but additional evidence is present in non-randomised studies
you may want to document how many of these you have excluded. This information may help
a funder to decide to commission a further review that takes into account these alternative
study designs. A valuable function of a scoping or mapping review is to code the presence or
absence of multiple characteristics so that you can ‘model’ the impact of each characteristic on
the numbers of included studies and therefore decide where the boundaries (in terms of country

=== p. 161 ===

of origin, specific population or study type) might be drawn to produce a review that is both
feasible and meaningful.

Steps in the study selection process
Experience suggests that the most efficient way of screening studies for inclusion in a literature
review is first to examine the titles of articles from your literature searches. However, where time
is at a premium, reviewers often combine screening of titles with the next stage which involves
screening the abstracts. Often you can tell from the title of an article whether or not it is relevant. After screening titles, you move on to look at the abstracts of any studies where you could
not judge relevance from the title alone.

                       rapid review tip 11

   Title and abstract screening
   You will find it helpful to develop a standardised title and abstract form (e.g. an Excel spreadsheet) and then conduct a pilot exercise using the same 30–50 abstracts for the entire
   screening team. The pilot helps to calibrate and test the review form efficiently. As time often
   does not permit independent double observer screening, you can use two reviewers to dual-screen at least 20% (ideally more) of abstracts, with conflict resolution. One reviewer then
   screens the remaining abstracts and a second reviewer screens all excluded abstracts (to
   minimise the risk of discarding relevant studies), and if needed they also resolve conflicts.

                                                                                    Garritty et al. (2021)

Finally, you examine the full text of studies obtained on the basis of how relevant these abstracts are to
your inclusion criteria. When excluding studies examined at the full text stage, you will find it useful
to record reasons for exclusion of each study for the sake of transparency and to help in subsequent
reporting. If you are using systematic review software, you can use it to record your decisions (Munn
et al., 2019). Some literature reviews list studies excluded by this full text screen, usually only those that
superficially look like they should have been included, together with reasons, in an appendix. This list
offers transparency and allows you to justify decisions you make in the study selection phase. You can
also anticipate queries as to why a particular study was excluded from your review.

                       rapid review tip 12

   Full text screening
   As for title/abstract screening, you should use a standardised full text form. For this stage you
   pilot the review form on the same 5–10 full text articles across the entire screening team. A
   single reviewer then screens all included full text articles and a second reviewer screens all
   excluded full text articles.

                                                                                    Garritty et al. (2021)

=== p. 162 ===

Using software for study selection
Chapter 5 presented different types of reference management software available to help you
manage the literature review process. You can tag records or apply keywords to fields in your
reference management database. For example, you can tag references that you have selected
for inclusion in your review at the abstract stage with the keyword ‘include abstract’ in one
of the unassigned database fields. This function allows you to retrieve a list of included
studies in the review by searching in that field for the keyword ’include abstract‘. Tagging
references in this way also provides you with an audit trail for decisions you have made
during the study selection process. At all times you should be able to know exactly which
studies have been included or excluded, at what stage (title, abstract or full text examination) and, within a team, by whom they have been excluded. Systematic review software
works in a similar way, automatically keeping track for you as you make inclusion and
exclusion decisions. Chapter 10 discusses why it is important to keep accurate records of the
study selection process.
  Free software packages (such as Rayyan) or commercial packages (such as Covidence or EPPI-Reviewer) allow you to import references from databases. You can then devise review-specific
menus of reasons for exclusion. If using systematic review software is not an option then there
are alternatives. Often those conducting reviews, especially reviews that offer a mapping function, import the bibliographic records either directly from the electronic databases or from reference management software into Microsoft Excel (or some similar spreadsheet package) and
construct pre-defined drop-down menus for each of the inclusion/exclusion criteria. You then
proceed systematically through the list of studies, viewing the abstract in the top panel of the
spreadsheet, and selecting the relevant category from the drop-down ‘pick list’ created in Excel.
Categorising each reference in this way helps when completing the subsequent PRISMA flowchart (see Figure 10.1). Categorising also helps when mapping different types of studies and
their frequencies. You can also filter on particular columns in Excel, to gain an instant result for
how many studies met or failed a particular inclusion/exclusion criterion.
  To apply the inclusion and exclusion criteria for your review for study selection,
complete Exercise 6.1.

   Study selection
   Now, revisit your inclusion and exclusion criteria from Chapter 5 and write them in the grid
   provided. Keep this grid to hand while you go through your study selection process.

      Tool for focusing your question – PICO, SPICE, etc.

      Inclusion criteria                              Exclusion criteria

      Population                                      Population

      Intervention/exposure/focus of interest         Intervention/exposure/focus of interest

=== p. 163 ===

    Comparator (if present)                         Comparator (if present)

    Outcome(s)                                      Outcome(s)

    Context                                         Context

ASSESSING YOUR INCLUDED STUDIES – FIRST STEPS
Once you have selected the articles for inclusion in your review, the next stage is to assess this evidence base in more detail. Here you are seeking to become immersed in, and familiar with, each
study so that you start to see how you might analyse and present your data. By this point, you
have produced a list of studies judged to have met all your review inclusion criteria (matched on
population, intervention/exposure/focus of interest, comparator, etc.; and study design) so you
know that each included study will provide findings that answer your review question in some
way. You need to examine each study in detail, taking all the meaningful information from each
included study (data extraction), before you start compiling and synthesising the information.
For whichever type of literature review you are undertaking, at this stage you are reading, becoming familiar with, digesting, reflecting upon and, perhaps unknowingly, making judgements on
each study included in your review. All these processes are involved in assessing the evidence base.
  The extent to which you assess the evidence base depends on the type of review and its aim.
For example, a systematic review generally involves an in-depth quality assessment of included
studies. Systematic reviews require you to reflect upon the credibility of the review’s findings; it
is essential that you identify how weaknesses or flaws of included studies impact upon review
findings. However, for a mapping review, where the aim is to map out and categorise the
literature as well as to identify any gaps (James et al., 2016), you assess the evidence base to
identify its key characteristics, such as study design, country of publication or general direction
of study findings, offering a rich picture of the literature to be described. The very existence of
a study may be meaningful, regardless of quality. Having recorded that a particular aspect of a
phenomenon has been studied, your secondary questions might then be ‘and is the study good
quality? … and can I trust its conclusions?’.
  All literature reviews involve, and benefit from, some assessment of the evidence base, which
helps to guide the subsequent stages of synthesis and writing up. If nothing else, at this stage
your assessment allows you to familiarise yourself with the intricacies of each study and to spot
where findings from studies agree with or differ from each another. More importantly, you will
start to suggest possible reasons for study similarities or differences. For example, what does an
individual study contribute to your review? Does it add strength to an argument, a conflicting
argument, a new argument, perspective or theory, or, perhaps, nothing new at all?
  To begin with, you should ask yourself, ‘What do I need to find out from my included
studies to fulfil the aim of my literature review?’. Table 6.1 presents four types of review
(introduced in Chapter 3) and looks at their aims in relation to how you might assess the
evidence base. For each review type, you can consider particular ‘key questions’ when assessing the evidence base (see Table 6.1). Answers to each question help to shape how you will
proceed with your review. Hopefully, you can identify which questions apply to each particular review type. For example, in a systematic review most, if not all, of the questions in
Table 6.1 are appropriate.

=== p. 164 ===

Table 6.1   Assessing the evidence base in different types of reviews

Type of review    evidence base                Practical application           Review example
Scoping review    •   Do any previous          Identifies previous reviews     A scoping review of the
                      reviews exist?           on your topic area to avoid     association between
                  •   How much evidence        duplication                     rural medical education
                      exists on my review                                      and rural practice
                                               If there is a significant
                      question?                                                location (Farmer et al.,
                                               volume of evidence, you
                  •   What type of                                             2015)
                                               might want to consider
                      evidence is available?   refining your scope. Too
                                               little evidence and you
                                               might want to broaden your
                                               question
                                               ‘Firms up’ review question
                                               by exploring what kind of
                                               evidence is out there. For
                                               example, if your review
                                               is limited to randomised
                                               controlled trials (RCTs) but
                                               your scoping search finds
                                               no trials, you may need
                                               to consider other types of
                                               research design. Similarly,
                                               if you have limited your
                                               review question to UK
                                               studies but found no UK
                                               studies in your scoping
                                               search, you may wish to
                                               widen to include research
                                               beyond the UK. It is
                                               particularly important to
                                               assess generalisability if
                                               looking at studies outside of
                                               the setting (context) of your
                                               review question

Mapping review    •   Where is evidence        Focus for subsequent            Maternity care
                      plentiful?               literature reviews              services and culture:
                  •   Where is evidence                                        a systematic
                                               Key features of evidence
                      lacking (gaps)?                                          global mapping of
                                               base include study design,
                  •   How can I describe                                       interventions (Coast
                                               country of publication,
                      the evidence?                                            et al., 2014)
                                               populations or subgroups,
                  •   Are there                nature of intervention or
                      relationships or key     exposures analysed (are
                      themes occurring?        they similar or do they
                                               differ greatly?)
                                               Explores:

                                               •   Directional effects
                                                   (A affects B)
                                               •   Whether studies are in
                                                   agreement
                                               •   Whether findings
                                                   conflict

=== p. 165 ===

Type of review    evidence base                Practical application          Review example

Systematic        •   How can I describe       Key features might include     Psychosocial
review                the evidence?            study design, country of       interventions for school
                  •   Are there                publication, populations       refusal with primary
                      relationships or key     or subgroups, nature of        and secondary school
                      themes occurring?        intervention or exposures      students: a systematic
                  •   How credible is the      analysed (are they similar     review (Maynard et al.,
                      evidence?                or do they differ greatly?)    2015)
                  •   How applicable is        Directional (A affects B)
                      the evidence to my
                      situation/scenario?      Studies in agreement
                  •   Where is evidence        Conflicting studies
                      lacking (gaps)?
                                               Quality of the study conduct
                                               and design: subgroup
                                               analyses
                                               Generalisability of research
                                               Areas for future research

Qualitative       •   How can I describe       Key features, for example      Treatment non-systematic            the evidence?            perspectives, settings         adherence in pediatric
review            •   What themes or           (are they similar or differ    long-term medical
                      constructs are           greatly?)                      conditions: systematic
                      present between                                         review and synthesis
                                               Interpretation of a
                      or within individual                                    of qualitative studies
                                               phenomenon – broaden
                      studies?                                                of caregivers’ views
                                               understanding
                  •   What is the quality of                                  (Santer et al., 2014)
                      the evidence?            Does this mediate the
                                               findings?

  Now consider your own review, and use Exercise 6.2 to decide the level of quality assessment
required.

   Assessing the evidence base for your review
   Consider the types of review in Table 6.1. Think about what questions you might want to ask
   when assessing the evidence base for your review:

      Your review question:

      Which key questions do you need to ask for your review?

      What is the practical application of your questions?

=== p. 166 ===

ASSESSING THE EVIDENCE BASE IN DETAIL
Systematic reviews of either quantitative or qualitative research studies require a transparent
and explicit exploration of study strengths and weaknesses to assess the impact of study quality
on the findings of each individual study included in the review. Quality assessment then moves
on to consider the findings of the literature review as a set of studies, documenting systemic
flaws in a discussion of the strengths and limitations of the evidence base. The rest of this chapter
considers quality assessment and its role in the review process.
  The first step of quality assessment is to decide whether an article is worth reading. Complete
Exercise 6.3 to practise this skill.

   When is an article worth reading?
   Before introducing quality assessment in more detail, when you come across a research study
   in a journal, consider:

   1. How do you decide whether an article is worth reading?
   2. What makes an article believable?

   In addressing Exercise 6.3 you can probably divide your factors into three distinct groups:

   • Applicability – the topic of the study, how important it is to you at the moment, the similarity of the setting to the one in which you work, the level at which it is written, the
     professional group or discipline for whom it is written, etc.
   • Extrinsic factors – those external factors assumed to relate to, but not always associated
     with, the quality of the article: who wrote it, where they work, what their job or qualifications are, whether you have heard of them, who paid for the study, in which journal it is
     published, whether the authors have written on the subject before.
   • Intrinsic factors – factors that relate to the study itself: the appropriateness of the study
     design to the question being asked, the suitability of the sample, the methods used to
     recruit the sample, and the methods used to obtain the results.

Assessing the quality of included studies – what is it
and why do we do it?
Quality assessment asks you to discard prejudices you may have regarding the extrinsic factors. It asks you to make an initial judgement about the relevance of the study, to look then
exclusively at the intrinsic factors using a structured checklist, before finally returning to
issues that relate to its suitability to your practice. In this way you follow a process that is as
objective and explicit as possible. On this basis, you can judge if a paper is worth reading, and if
it is believable. Quality assessment forms part of the examination of confidence in research

=== p. 167 ===

findings. Quality assessment is critical ‘for judging the overall strength of evidence on given
research questions and is considered in evaluation of the methodological quality of a research
design and implementation rather than the intervention’s true effect in the process of research’
(Seo & Kim, 2012).
  Generalisability or applicability is often considered alongside quality assessment, and
reflects on how research findings (if at all) impact on practice. In the context of qualitative
studies you consider whether the findings are transferable. Considering how the research is
applicable, transferable or generalisable defines the difference between critical appraisal and
a simple ‘critical reading’ of the research (Booth & Brice, 2004).
  Every study included in your literature review has weaknesses or flaws. You need to identify
each weakness or flaw to determine, first, its potential impact on the findings of an individual
study and, second, its implications for the findings of your review as a whole. You need to
become aware of both the strengths and flaws of included studies in your review so that you can
take these into account when presenting and discussing your review findings.
  All studies have weaknesses but, by considering their impact upon the study findings, you
can determine which flaws are critical and which are not. Remember that undertaking research
is fraught with difficulties. Several things can ‘go wrong’ or not as originally planned in research
studies (e.g. failing to recruit sufficient participants to your study). You may find yourself becoming very scathing about studies when you are assessing their quality! This belief that no paper is
ever good enough has been labelled critical appraisal ‘nihilism’ (Sackett et al., 1997). However,
the function of quality assessment is not to pursue some ideal of study perfection (Petticrew
& Roberts, 2006). Assessing the evidence base focuses on how to apply research in practice and
you need to be similarly practical when performing quality assessment. Therefore, if a particular
flaw has minimal or limited impact on the findings of a study, is it really that important?
  However, you do not only use quality assessment to identify study flaws. Using a structured
formal approach allows you to explore the detailed contents of a paper in terms of both its methodology and findings. It is therefore basically a type of ‘sensitisation’ to a study; an important
journey of discovery for the reader (Booth, 2007). By critically examining published research,
you become aware of how others have conducted research. This also mean, you become better
at designing and conducting your own research studies. For example, if you identify certain
weaknesses in the design of a particular study, you might recommend that the research should
be repeated using a stronger study design. Where a study failed to recruit enough participants,
you might recommend repeating the study with a larger sample to determine conclusive results.
  Lastly, quality assessment is helpful in identifying differences between studies; the technical
term is heterogeneity. Heterogeneity is discussed further in Chapters 7 and 8. For example,
smaller studies tend to overestimate findings in comparison to larger studies (Higgins et al., 2021).

Study designs – is there a hierarchy of evidence?
Before exploring quality assessment in more detail, you will find it useful to understand the
different types of study design used in research. Some research designs are better able to answer
certain questions. Therefore, early in the process of quality assessment, you need to consider: ‘Is
this the most appropriate study design to answer this research question?’. If you are not familiar
with study designs, take a look at the resources available on the Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine website (www.cebm.net, Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine, 2020).

=== p. 168 ===

Question                 Step 1                    Step 2                     Step 3                 Step 4                      Step 5 (Level 5)
                         (Level 1*)                (Level 2*)                 (Level 3*)             (Level 4*)
How common is the        Local and current         Systematic review          Local non-random       Case-series**               n/a
problem?                 random sample             of surveys that allow      sample**
                         surveys (or censuses)     matching to local
                                                   circumstances**
Is this diagnostic       Systematic review of      Individual cross           Non-consecutive        Case-control studies, or    Mechanism-based
or monitoring test       cross sectional studies   sectional studies with     studies, or studies    poor or non-independent     reasoning
accurate?                with consistently         consistently applied       without consistently   reference standard**
(Diagnosis)              applied reference         reference standard and     applied reference
                         standard and blinding     blinding                   standards**
What will happen if we   Systematic review         Inception cohort studies   Cohort study or        Case-series or case-        n/a
do not add a therapy?    of inception cohort                                  control arm of         control studies, or poor
(Prognosis)              studies                                              randomized trial*      quality prognostic cohort
                                                                                                     study**
Does this intervention   Systematic review of      Randomized trial or        Non-randomized         Case-series, case-          Mechanism-based
help?                    randomized trials or      observational study with   controlled cohort/     control studies, or         reasoning
(Treatment Benefits)     n-of-1 trials             dramatic effect            follow-up study**      historically controlled
                                                                                                     studies**

=== p. 169 ===

 Question                            Step 1                           Step 2                             Step 3                           Step 4                             Step 5 (Level 5)
                                     (Level 1*)                       (Level 2*)                         (Level 3*)                       (Level 4*)
 What are the COMMON                 Systematic review                Individual randomized              Non-randomized                   Case-series, case-                 Mechanism-based
 harms?                              of randomized trials,            trial or (exceptionally)           controlled cohort/               control, or historically           reasoning
 (Treatment Harms)                   systematic review of             observational study with           follow-up study                  controlled studies**
                                     nested case-control              dramatic effect                    (post-marketing
                                     studies, n of- 1 trial                                              surveillance) provided
                                     with the patient you are                                            there are sufficient
                                     raising the question                                                numbers to rule out a
                                     about, or observational                                             common harm. (For
                                     study with dramatic                                                 long-term harms the
                                     effect                                                              duration of follow-up
 What are the RARE                   Systematic review of             Randomized trial                   must be sufficient.)**
 harms?                              randomized trials or             or (exceptionally)
 (Treatment Harms)                   n-of-1 trial                     observational study with
                                                                      dramatic effect
 Is this (early detection)           Systematic review of             Randomized trial                   Non-randomized                   Case-series, case-                 Mechanism-based
 test worthwhile?                    randomized trials                                                   controlled cohort/               control, or historically           reasoning
 (Screening)                                                                                             follow-up study**                controlled studies**

Figure 6.1 Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine 2011 Levels of Evidence
* Level may be graded down on the basis of study quality, imprecision, indirectness (study PICO does not match questions PICO), because of inconsistency between studies, or because the absolute
effect size is very small; Level may be graded up if there is a large or very large effect size.

** As always, a systematic review is generally better than an individual study.

How to cite the Levels of Evidence Table
OCEBM Levels of Evidence Working Group*. “The Oxford 2011 Levels of Evidence”.
Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine. http://www.cebm.net/index.aspx?o=5653
* OCEBM Table of Evidence Working Group = Jeremy Howick, Iain Chalmers (James Lind Library), Paul Glasziou, Trish Greenhalgh, Carl Heneghan, Alessandro Liberati, Ivan Moschetti, Bob Phillips, Hazel Thornton,
Olive Goddard and Mary Hodgkinson

=== p. 170 ===

  Health research pays particular attention to how well particular study designs can answer particular types of research questions; the randomised controlled trial (RCT) is considered the gold
standard study design to answer whether an intervention is effective. The idea of the ‘best
study design for a research question’ has been used prescriptively within health research, where
hierarchies of evidence have been proposed. These hierarchies rank study designs from the
most robust down to the least robust for answering a type of question. For example, for reviews of
effectiveness of an intervention, randomised controlled trials are normally placed at the top of the
hierarchy with case studies at the bottom. Of course, high-quality systematic reviews that combine multiple well-conducted examples will always be considered superior to the findings of an
individual well-conducted study. Checklists such as AMSTAR 2 or ROBIS perform similarly when
used to assess whether systematic reviews are to be considered high-quality (Pieper et al., 2019).
  One of the most cited examples of a published hierarchy is the ‘Levels of Evidence’ produced
by the Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine (Howick et al., n.d.) (Figure 6.1). This hierarchy allows the reader to select a particular type of research question and to identify which study
designs are the most robust.
  However, classifying research designs in this way may cause problems (Petticrew & Roberts,
2003; Greenhalgh et al., 2018). First, hierarchies can give a false impression that a poorly conducted randomised controlled trial offers better evidence than a well-conducted observational
study. Second, it is often not straightforward to determine which research design is the most
appropriate since the choice may be limited by practical and ethical considerations. For example, it would not be ethical to randomise study participants to smoking tobacco cigarettes, so
you could only observe what happens when people choose cigarettes for themselves. Third,
hierarchies of evidence are not good at exploring the quality of qualitative research; a study
design where a researcher lives alongside study participants is quite different from one where
the researcher comes in as an outsider (Taylor et al., 2007). Finally, most hierarchies are health
research focused, and their value is contested by researchers within other disciplines (Taylor
et al., 2007). A more flexible approach creates a taxonomy for each type of question, so that you
pick the appropriate taxonomy to match the question type (Petticrew & Roberts, 2003).
  Whatever your discipline, you will find it invaluable to be aware of different types of study
design, the flaws or biases to which they are prone and, particularly, their effect on study findings. However, in a multidisciplinary setting, you may find it more helpful to consider when
particular studies may be reasonably used and what their strengths or weaknesses are. Thus, this
section takes a broad look at three ‘families’ of study design: descriptive, analytic experimental
and analytical observational.
  Studies can be broadly classified into descriptive or analytic designs. Descriptive study
designs focus on describing or giving us a picture of what is happening in a population (e.g.
cross-sectional surveys and qualitative studies). Analytic studies try to quantify relationships between factors (Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine, 2020); for example, the effect
of an Information Technology (IT) intervention on maths ability. Analytic studies are further
classified according to whether or not researchers measure the effects of an exposure without
manipulating the intervention or exposure in any way. In an experimental analytic study the
researcher manipulates an intervention or exposure, for example in an RCT by allocating participants to different intervention or exposure groups.
  The key characteristic of experimental studies is that they are designed to control bias. Beyond
this they may differ in key features of their study design. Experimental studies may measure an
outcome at a single point in time (cross-sectional) or measure that same outcome over an

=== p. 171 ===

extended period (longitudinal). Studies may also differ in whether they collect data as they go
forwards in time (prospective) or whether they look backwards to collect data, whether from
records or recollection (retrospective). Further variation will see studies containing a single or
multiple group(s) of participants (including random or non-random allocation of study participants to groups within a study), and being described as either blind or open label. Each feature
of an experimental study design has implications for the research, as explored in Tables 6.2–6.6.

Table 6.2 Cross-sectional versus longitudinal studies

Study design feature        Implications                                         this feature
Cross-sectional:            Cheap and simple          Cannot determine           Survey
records outcomes            to set up. Ideal for      a cause-and-effect
or examines                 pinpointing the           relationship between
relationships between       prevalence of a           two variables
variables at one point      particular situation,
in time only (snapshot      for example what
in time)                    number of higher
                            education students
                            visit their public
                            library?
Longitudinal: records       Changes over time         More complicated to        Cohort study
observations over a         are recorded in a         set up and more costly     Randomised controlled
period of time (can be      population or outcome     than cross-sectional       trial
several years)              so more plausible to      studies. Causality may
                            determine a cause-        only be determined if
                            and-effect relationship   confounding factors are
                                                      controlled for

Table 6.3     Prospective versus retrospective studies

Study design feature         Implications                                              use this feature
Prospective: forward-        Able to determine            Can be prone to              Cohort study
looking and observe          cause and effect and         large loss of study          Randomised
for outcomes. Typically,     provide ‘real’ incidence     participants (attrition).    controlled trial
a group or cohort of         rates. Can uncover           The outcome of interest
individuals is identified    unanticipated outcomes       must be common or the
and followed for a long      or associations              study will fail to recruit
period of time                                            enough participants
                                                          to make the findings
                                                          meaningful

Retrospective: identify      Able to determine cause      Looking ‘backwards’,         Case–control studies
a group of individuals       and effect; particularly     particularly when            Cohort studies
who have had a               useful when an outcome       asking study                 (occasionally)
particular outcome and       is rare                      participants to
then look back in time                                    remember events or
to record details about                                   details in the past
what interventions                                        makes retrospective
or exposures they                                         studies particularly
received                                                  prone to recall bias

=== p. 172 ===

Table 6.4   Studies with one group versus studies with more than one group

Study design feature    Implications                                            this feature
One group of study      Fewer participants need     Between-group               Survey
participants            be recruited to the study   comparisons cannot          Cohort study
                                                    be made
                                                                                Case–control study
                                                    Confounding factors
                                                    may not be taken
                                                    into account
                                                    as easily

Two groups of study     Between-group               Requires extra              Survey
participants            comparisons to be made      participants to be          Cohort study
                                                    recruited
                        Confounding factors can                                 Case control study
                        be taken into account
                        more easily                                             RCT

                        Groups can be balanced

Table 6.5   Random versus not random allocation

Study design feature    Implications                                             use this feature
Non-random allocation   Not always possible or      Because participants         Cohort study
                        ethical to randomise        may have chosen              Case–control study
                        participants to different   which study group
                        groups (e.g. in a study     they are in (or the
                        investigating smokers       researcher has done
                        and non-smokers)            so for them), this
                                                    significantly biases the
                                                    For example, if there
                                                    were two groups of
                                                    children – Group 1 in the
                                                    top set for maths and
                                                    Group 2 in the bottom
                                                    set for maths – and
                                                    a study investigated
                                                    performance in
                                                    physics, the two groups
                                                    of children are not
                                                    similar

Random allocation       Allows equal balancing      Not always possible or       RCT
                        of confounding factors      ethical to randomise
                                                    participants to
                        Limits bias in terms of
                                                    different groups
                        participant selection
                        of an intervention or
                        exposure

=== p. 173 ===

Table 6.6     Blind versus open-label studies

Study design feature      Implications                                           use this feature
Blinding: an individual   Anticipation of the      Not always possible or        RCT
is not aware of what      placebo effect: a        ethical to blind-study        Cohort study
intervention or           phenomenon whereby       participants or researchers
exposure they are         study participants
given.                    experience
Individuals who           improvement in
can be blinded            an outcome after
                          receiving ‘something’
include participants,
                          that should in
researchers and
                          theory not produce
analysts. So a study
                          an improvement in
can be single, double
or triple blind
                          Prevention of observer
                          bias in researchers
                          and analysts

Open label: an            Not always possible      Participants may              RCT
individual is aware       or ethical to blind-     exaggerate an                 Cohort study
of what intervention      study participants or    improvement if they
or exposure they are      research personnel,      think they are receiving
receiving                 e.g. in a study          something that is supposed
                          investigating surgery    to have an effect
Again, this includes
                          versus no surgery
participants,                                      Researchers may
researchers and                                    exaggerate findings
analysts                                           according to their
                                                   own biases

Quality assessment: validity, reliability and applicability
To undertake quality assessment, you need to understand the principles underpinning the process. These can be split into the three key concepts of validity, reliability and applicability.
We consider each concept in turn.

Validity (are the results of a study true?)
The way in which research is designed and undertaken has an influence on whether the results
can be considered ‘true’ or ‘valid’. Are there any flaws in how the research has been carried out
that may invalidate the findings? Simply the act of undertaking research can alter study findings
from reality. Imagine if one of your tutors told you that the occupational health department
wanted you and your fellow course participants to take part in a study of how often you wash
your hands. Would you be likely to alter your hand-washing practices? Would the findings of
the study accurately represent hand-washing practices or would they present a distorted picture?
  So in assessing validity we ask, ‘How much have the methods used to obtain the results
thrown into question the findings themselves?’(Booth & Brice, 2004). The rigour of the research
refers to the degree to which the design of the study and its conduct minimises the risk of bias

=== p. 174 ===

and takes into account confounding, two key flaws that can affect all studies. Bias is ‘anything
that erroneously influences the conclusions about groups and distorts comparisons’ (Rose &
Barker, 1994). Systematic errors in the conduct of a study include how participants are selected
to take part, how outcomes are measured or how data is analysed. All of these can lead to inaccurate results (Cameron et al., 2014). Confounding is where you cannot ascertain whether an
effect is caused by the variable you are interested in or by another variable. For example, a study
may demonstrate a link between alcohol consumption and lung cancer. However, alcohol consumption is commonly associated with smoking, and thus smoking is a potential confounder
for your study. Studies can be designed to take account of potential confounding at the analysis
stage, or to ensure that groups within the study are stratified to achieve equal distribution of
participants with the confounding factor (in this example, smoking). Whichever method is
chosen, the researcher should demonstrate that they have identified potential confounders at
the beginning of the study. Common confounding variables include age, sex and ethnicity.
  To illustrate sources of bias and confounding, read the accompanying study scenario
(Exercise 6.4). Try to answer the accompanying questions.

      Study scenario – identifying sources of bias
      Can an IT intervention improve primary schoolchildren’s performance in solving maths
      problems?
         A teacher selects 20 primary schoolchildren to take part in this study as a reward for good
      behaviour. At the start of the study, each child completes a maths problems test consisting of
      10 questions. Each child then completes a one-hour online workbook in which they complete a
      series of maths problems in the form of fun games and exercises. The children then complete
      another maths problems test of 10 questions, and the number answered correctly is recorded.
      The teacher asks each child to recall how many they got correct in the maths test before the
      study started.

      1. What sources of bias can you see?

         Hint 1: might the children selected to take part in the study differ in any way from those
         who did not take part?

         Hint 2: do you think the children could accurately (and truthfully!) recall their score for the
         test they took at the beginning of the study?

      2. Aside from the sources of bias in this study, what other factors might limit the credibility of the study findings?

Reliability (what are the results?)
All research results are subject to the possible effects of chance. Reliability refers to the trustworthiness of the results: ‘What is the likelihood that this study reports something that is

=== p. 175 ===

reproducible as opposed to being a “fluke or chance result”?’ (Booth & Brice, 2004). Researchers
can run statistical tests to determine how likely it is that results are due to chance. Techniques
generate a range of plausible values for the repeated measurement of the effect. You can then
judge whether you would make the same decision based on the very best and the very worst
estimate of the effect. However, statisticians choose arbitrary thresholds for determining chance,
typically 5% or 1 in 20; if something occurs more frequently than this, it is considered unlikely
to be due to the influence of chance (Booth & Brice, 2004) and is labelled statistically significant. You should also consider whether results are meaningful – is the effect large enough to
be practically significant? For example, a study might demonstrate a change in five points
on a scale that measures improvement in computer skills. This change of five points might be
statistically significant but a teacher may only consider a change of ten points or more to
be practically significant.

Applicability (can we generalise the results?)
Once you have assessed the validity and reliability of a study, you need to determine whether
the results actually are useful. Validity and reliability are concerned with estimating the strength
of the evidence, whereas applicability is concerned with the strength of recommendations for
practice (based on the study results).
  Continuing with our study scenario, imagine you are the headteacher of a primary school and
you are reading the results of a systematic literature review investigating whether an IT intervention improves primary schoolchildren’s performance in solving maths problems. The review
found seven studies designed to test this research question; however, the results are conflicting
between the studies. Five studies found that IT did improve students’ performance in a weekly
maths test, while two showed no evidence of such an effect. By examining the studies in more
detail, you realise that the five supportive studies were undertaken in a group of children aged
8–9 years old, whereas the two studies that did not find a positive effect were undertaken in
children of a younger age group (4–5 years old). You might reasonably suggest that the IT-based
maths computer program should only be taken up by classes of older children at the school.
Note this is not a flaw of the individual studies included in the review, but simply reflects differences in the age of study participants. It thus relates to how your findings apply in practice.

Carrying out quality assessment
Now that we have covered the theory, how do you tackle the quality assessment? While every
article is different, assessment of quality can be split into four stages (LoBiondo-Wood et al.,
2002) (Box 6.1).
  Even if you do not undertake full quality assessment for your review, you always need to follow the first two steps in Box 6.1. In developing a preliminary and then comprehensive understanding of each study, you arrive at an overall understanding of the individual contribution
of that study. Most literature reviews involve some form of analysis understanding. The depth
to which you break down the study into parts depends on which data is most important for
your review. For example, in a mapping review you may be concerned with a few items of

=== p. 176 ===

information such as the type of studies, country and key themes. In contrast, in a systematic
review, the details of study design are required in great depth, and so this involves ‘drilling
down’ into the study for much of the necessary detail.

      Four stages of quality assessment

      Preliminary understanding – skimming or quickly reading to gain familiarity with the content
      and layout of the paper.

      Comprehensive understanding – increasing understanding of concepts and research terms.

      Analysis understanding – breaking the study into parts and seeking to understand each part.

      Synthesis understanding – pulling the above steps together to make a (new) whole, making
      sense of it and explaining relationships.

A useful place to start is by reading the abstract. The format of the abstract varies between disciplines. Increasingly within the medical literature, structured abstracts (with headings) are being
adopted. These help the reader quickly assess the study design, participants and key results.
Abstracts in other disciplines may be less structured but give a flavour of what the study is about.
After reading the abstract, to gain a deeper understanding of the study, you start to read the
paper in full. While the Introduction, Discussion and Conclusion can help in understanding
the paper, it is the Methods section that allows you to determine the quality of the paper. The
Results section, too, may indicate the significance of the individual study. Remember that practical relevance may not feature in the Results section but may be considered in the Discussion
section. An ‘anatomy of a systematic review’ is a useful tool to assist with understanding the
parts that make up a systematic review and covers what information you would expect to find in
each section of a review (National Collaborating Centre for Methods and Tools, 2017).

Published reviews in your subject area
You can start to understand quality assessment in your discipline by investigating methods
used in reviews in your topic. You can start to understand why particular approaches have been
chosen, which checklists (or combinations of checklists) are widely used, and how authors present information on study features (see, for example, Zhou et al., 2015). Finally, a review from
a similar topic may help you to identify which key study flaws and strengths are most likely to
occur in your review.
  Different approaches to quality and relevance assessment are demonstrated by systematic
reviews from different disciplines (Table 6.7). Similar variation is apparent for other types of literature reviews such as mapping and scoping reviews (examine the reviews listed in Table 6.1).
Other types of reviews featured throughout this book may also be useful. Further examples are
found in the EPPI-Centre, the Campbell Library, the Cochrane Library and the Environmental
Evidence Library of Evidence Syntheses.

=== p. 177 ===

Table 6.7 Examples of systematic reviews from different disciplines

Health           Breathing exercises for    As per Cochrane Handbook criteria of assessment of risk
                 asthma (Santino et al.,    of bias version 2 (Higgins et al., 2021)
                 2020)

Social welfare   The impact of              Studies assessed using extension of Cochrane
                 detention on the health    Collaboration’s original risk of bias tool. The extension
                 of asylum seekers: a       covers risk of bias in non-randomised studies with a well-systematic review          defined control group
                 (Filges et al., 2015)      The risk of bias model used is based on nine items:

                                            •   sequence generation
                                            •   allocation concealment
                                            •   confounders
                                            •   blinding
                                            •   incomplete outcome data
                                            •   selective outcome reporting
                                            •   other potential threats to validity
                                            •   a priori protocol
                                            •   a priori analysis plan

Psychology       Psychological              Quality assessment addressed:
                 and educational
                                            •   Randomisation (method of generation and
                 interventions for atopic
                                                concealment of allocation)
                 eczema in children
                                            •   Blinding of observers (blinding of participants
                 (Ersser et al., 2014)
                                                was not possible because of the nature of the
                                                intervention)
                                            •   Loss to follow-up (presence of dropouts and
                                                withdrawals and the analysis of these)
                                            •   Other bias

                                            Each component was categorised as low risk, unclear risk
                                            or high risk as advised by the Cochrane Handbook for
                                            Systematic Reviews of Interventions

Education        Impacts of after-          The study reviewers listed 39 qualities that they felt
                 school programmes          should be included in the reporting of a rigorous
                 on student outcomes        experimental study. These were adapted from the What
                 (Goerlich Zief et al.,     Works Clearinghouse Study Review Standards (2005).
                 2006)                      Four specific standards were selected for a study to be
                                            included:
                                            (a) no specific evidence of control group contamination
                                            (b) neither overall study attrition nor differential attrition
                                                would bias impact estimates
                                            (c) appropriate statistical measures used for analyses and
                                            (d) primary impact analyses conducted on all available
                                                sample members at follow-up

                                            Two reviewers independently read each full study, applied
                                            study quality criteria and recommended whether study
                                            should be included

=== p. 178 ===

Library and     The attitudes and            When selecting studies for inclusion, authors categorised
information     behaviours of illegal        literature into four ‘classes’, which included assessment
science         downloaders (Williams        of quality:
                et al., 2010)
                                             •   Class A – Studies with high validity and a
                                                 robust methodology that have been highly cited.
                                                 (Note: high citations do not necessarily indicate high
                                                 quality – a study could equally be cited as
                                                 bad research!)
                                             •   Class B – Credible studies with a lesser degree of
                                                 confidence, typically related to methodological issues:
                                                 small-scale surveys, convenience sampling, limited
                                                 case study interviews, etc.
                                             •   Class C – Research that was not very sound in terms
                                                 of methodology, rigour and validity
                                             •   Class D – Minimal or no real research content (e.g.
                                                 opinion pieces)

Computer        Using text mining for        Critical appraisal conducted within data extraction tool.
sciences        study identification in      Quality assessed by two questions:
                systematic reviews: a
                systematic review of         •   Sampling of test cases – how generalisable is the
                current approaches               sample of reviews selected?
                (O’Mara-Eves et al., 2015)   •   Is the method sufficiently described to be replicated?

Using checklists
For experienced and novice reviewers alike, checklists can be particularly helpful in guiding
the process of quality and relevance assessment. For the novice reviewer, checklists provide
a comprehensive list of what to consider for quality assessment. Checklists may also help
when considering study relevance, typically considered by the last three questions on Critical
Appraisal Skills Programme checklists (CASP, n.d.). However, as you become experienced at
quality assessment, checklists act as a prompt to help you consider all relevant points. The
tools in this chapter point to various multidisciplinary sources of checklists for diverse study
designs. However, be sure to investigate reviews within your discipline to give you pointers
on how quality assessment is undertaken within your research area (Davoudi et al., 2015). For
example, checklists in social work and social care have been discussed (Wells & Littell, 2009)
and developed (Taylor et al., 2007). Also consider whether a generic checklist for each type of
question, such as CASP, meets your needs or whether you need to adapt a checklist to your
own topic area. If you adapt a published checklist, be sure to note this when writing up the
methodology for your review. However, we advise that you try to avoid devising your own
checklist as far as possible; it may indicate you have not looked carefully enough for an appropriate tool, it makes it difficult to compare your assessments to other reviews, and checklist
development is now a science (Whiting et al., 2017) requiring its own literature review and
expert panel!

=== p. 179 ===

   The CASP set of critical appraisal checklists
   Access the CASP Set of Critical Appraisal Checklists (https://casp-uk.net/casp-toolschecklists/). This set of eight critical appraisal tools is designed for use when reading
   research. Browse through the checklists and select a checklist of potential interest (e.g.
   the checklists for systematic reviews or qualitative research). Familiarise yourself with the
   checklist structure and the individual question items. How can you tell that this checklist was
   designed for appraising individual papers and was not intended for quality assessing papers
   for inclusion in a review?

Table 6.8 lists a few key checklist resources by study design or topic. See Box 6.3 for tips on selecting a checklist. A recent article summarises the principal checklists for common study designs
(Ma et al., 2020).

Table 6.8 Key quality assessment checklist resources – quantitative designs

                                      Study design checklists
Systematic Reviews Toolbox        Searchable online catalogue of tools to support systematic
(http://systematicreviewtools.    reviews. Focuses on automated tools (software), but other tools
com/)                             (e.g. checklists) also included. For quality assessment tools,
                                  select ‘Other Tools’ in ‘Advanced Search’ function and ‘quality
                                  assessment’ from ‘Find Me’ feature list

Critical Appraisal Skills         Checklists for following study designs:
Programme (CASP)
                                  •   Case–control studies
                                  •   Clinical prediction rules
                                  •   Cohort studies
                                  •   Diagnostic test studies
                                  •   Economic evaluation studies
                                  •   Randomised controlled trials (RCTs)
                                  •   Systematic reviews

STROBE (STrengthening the         Checklists for:
Reporting of OBservational
                                  •   Case–control studies
studies in Epidemiology)
                                  •   Cohort studies
                                  •   Cohort, case–control, and cross-sectional studies (combined)
                                  •   Cross-sectional studies

ROBINS-I: A tool for              In target trial, effect of interest is typically that of either:
assessing risk of bias in         assignment to intervention at baseline (start of follow-up),
non-randomised studies of         regardless of the extent to which intervention was received during
interventions                     follow-up (sometimes referred to as ‘intention-to-treat’ effect); or
                                  starting and adhering to intervention as indicated in trial protocol
                                  (sometimes referred to as ‘per-protocol’ effect)

=== p. 180 ===

JBI Critical Appraisal Tools      Checklists for following study designs:
(https://joannabriggs.org/ebp/    Cohort, case–control and cross-sectional studies (combined)
critical_appraisal_tools)
                                  Analytical cross-sectional studies
                                  Case–control studies
                                  Case reports
                                  Case series
                                  Cohort studies
                                  Diagnostic test accuracy studies
                                  Economic evaluations
                                  Prevalence studies
                                  Quasi-experimental studies (non-randomised experimental
                                  studies)
                                  Randomised controlled trials
                                  Systematic reviews
                                  Text and opinion

AMSTAR 2: Assessing the           An instrument for critically appraising systematic reviews of
methodological quality of         randomised controlled trials:
systematic reviews                https://amstar.ca/Amstar-2.php

ROBIS: A risk of bias             Tool completed in three phases:
assessment tool for
                                  1. Assess relevance (optional)
systematic reviews (https://
                                  2. Identify concerns with the review process:
www.bristol.ac.uk/populationhealth-sciences/projects/             •   Study eligibility criteria
robis/robis-tool/)                    •   Identification and selection of studies
                                      •   Data collection and study appraisal
                                      •   Synthesis and findings

                                  3. Judge risk of bias

Case studies (Atkins &            Case studies
Sampson, 2002)

Mixed methods studies (Pluye      http://mixedmethodsappraisaltoolpublic.pbworks.com/w/
& Hong, 2014)                     page/24607821/FrontPage

                                     Topic-specific checklists

Evidence-based library and information science (http://ebltoolkit.pbworks.com/f/
EBLCriticalAppraisalChecklist.pdf)

Education – ReLIANT (Readers guide to the Literature on Interventions Addressing the Need for
education and Training) (Koufogiannakis et al., 2006)

                                          Generic checklists

Standard quality assessment criteria for evaluating primary research papers from a variety of fields
(Kmet et al., 2004)

=== p. 181 ===

TOOLBOX – QUALITY ASSESSMENT CHECKLISTS
Do not be put off by the first few occasions you undertake quality assessment. From our experience quality assessment of a complicated study is time consuming and may require you to
revisit your quality judgements, perhaps on multiple occasions. However, you will soon become
proficient and, consequently, quicker – especially as you become familiar with a specific quality
assessment method. The more quality assessments you undertake, the more adept you become
at spotting the key strengths or weaknesses of a study – the same flaws in published studies often
occur again and again, especially in the same topic area.

   Tips on checklists
   • Remember quality and relevance assessment vary by discipline. Take a look at reviews in
     your discipline and examine how authors have undertaken quality and relevance assessment, and also which checklist they have used. See Table 6.7 for examples and key features
     of reviews in different disciplines.
   • Stick to checklists that have been validated or widely accepted in your discipline. Again,
     examining reviews in your discipline will help to identify the accepted checklists.
   • Avoid checklists that employ scoring systems. It is dangerous to label studies with scores,
     and not particularly helpful in understanding how the study strengths and weaknesses
     contribute to the validity of the study findings. In fact, the Cochrane methods guide for
     systematic reviews actively discourages use of checklists that assess quality using a scoring system (Higgins et al., 2021).
   • Remember what you are trying to achieve through quality and relevance assessment –
     checklists are only a guide. You may spot study features that are not picked up by your
     checklist and these can still be reported.
   • Lastly, if a suitable tool really does not exist, rather than trying to create your own
     checklist from scratch (which is not advised), you could adapt an existing checklist, or
     select criteria from different checklists and devise your own meta-checklist. (However,
     do remember to justify why you have had to do so and reference the contributing
     checklist.)

Case Study – Drafting a checklist
When undertaking work for a UK national quasi-governmental organisation in 2017 we identified an absence of checklists for quality assessing mapping reviews and scoping reviews.
We therefore produced two checklists that focused on how review methods are reported (i.e.
how closely they follow recognised review methods) to help when reviewing types. Abbreviated
versions of these two checklists are summarised in Tables 6.9 and 6.10. Subsequently a checklist
for scoping reviews has been published (Cooper et al., 2021).

=== p. 182 ===

Table 6.9    Thirteen questions to help you make sense of a mapping review

Questions 1–3 are screening questions. You can answer these quickly. If your answer is ‘yes’, it is worth
proceeding with the remaining questions. Prompts are given after each question. These remind you
why the question is important
Whereas a scoping review provides an overview of ‘what is out there’ on a particular topic, a
mapping review focuses on where literature is found
(A) Are the results of the mapping review valid?

Screening questions
Hint: Scope can be ‘focused’ in terms of PICOS, publication types, geographical/time limits/setting
Hint: ‘The best sort of studies’ would address the review’s question and match a pre-specified list of
study designs, if feasible
3. Is a mapping review the         Yes/No/Cannot Tell
Hint: A mapping review seeks: to examine the extent, range and nature of research activity, and areas
within a topic already adequately addressed by research/systematic reviews; to familiarise the reader
with the current state of knowledge; to identify absolute gaps not adequately addressed by research
and synthesis gaps not adequately addressed by systematic reviews; and to determine where full
systematic reviews might usefully be targeted
Hint: Look for databases used; details of the search strategy and the terms used; journals in the topic
area; vulnerability to time trends; use of reference lists, inclusion of unpublished/published studies/
non-English language studies, if appropriate
Note: Bias in a mapping review depends not on whether content has been critically evaluated, but on
how comprehensively/consistently the protocol has been followed and how well processes, decisions
and results have been documented
   stakeholders, if appropriate?
Hint: Consider whether: review team sought published research and research in progress; stakeholder
perspectives are included; stakeholders informed review scope, identification of literature, analysis
and/or interpretation of review
6. Have authors used a             Yes/No/Cannot Tell
   meaningful taxonomy or
   classification to organise/
   present results?
Hint: Consider whether: users would recognise categories/classification/labels used; authors have
used a recognised framework/coding system; when using a pre-existing taxonomy/classification, is
there a clear/transparent link between categories used and literature coded within each category?

=== p. 183 ===

7. Are categories mutually           Yes/No/Cannot Tell
   exclusive, clearly defined,
   explicit and at an appropriate
   level of granularity for the
   review purpose?
Hint: Consider whether definitions offer consistency of coding and/or of interpretation of results;
inter-rater reliability is considered for categorisation

8. Do the authors characterise       Yes/No/Cannot Tell
   the quantity of included
   studies?
Hint: Consider whether the review authors present total numbers of studies identified within
meaningful sub-categories; discuss likelihood of missing studies; assess limitations of search process
and implications for the mapping review

9. Do the authors characterise       Yes/No/Cannot Tell
   the likely quality/types of
   study designs of included
   studies?
Hint: Consider whether the review presents overall data on study quality or categorises study designs
within meaningful sub-categories; whether authors consider types of study/study design missed by search
strategy; whether authors assess if the types of study retrieved by search answer the review question

10. Do the authors use               Yes/No/Cannot Tell
    appropriate narrative/
    tabular/graphical displays
    to present distribution of
    included articles, concepts
    within literature or linkages?

    statement of implications
    of the evidence base for
    further research/further
    reviews, identifying
    strengths, weaknesses,
    opportunities or gaps?

12. Does the review offer            Yes/No/Cannot Tell
    yielded by further research/
    reviews?
Hint: Consider whether authors suggest a clearly defined role for a further review

13. Is the data mapped within        Yes/No/Cannot Tell
    the review sufficient to
    sustain further related
    questions or analyses?
Hint: Consider if: coding is sufficiently clear, transparent and comprehensive to sustain additional
   lines of enquiry/analyses; data supplements/complementary database are available for further
   analyses; authors can suggest topics or issues for further exploration and acknowledge
   uncertainties or volatility around interpretation of the map

=== p. 184 ===

Table 6.10    Eleven questions to help you make sense of a scoping review

Questions 1–3 are screening questions and can be answered quickly. If your answer is ‘yes’, you can
proceed to the remaining questions. Prompts are given after each question. These remind you why
the question is important
Scoping reviews are used to identify knowledge gaps, set research agendas and identify implications
for decision-making
(A) Are the results of the scoping review valid?
Screening Questions
Hint: Scope can be ‘focused’ in terms of PICOS and publication types
Hint: ‘The best sort of studies’ would address the review’s question and have an appropriate study
design
3. Is a scoping review the         Yes/No/Cannot Tell
Hint: A scoping review would seek to examine the extent, range and nature of research activity and
the extent to which the topic is already addressed by research/systematic reviews; to determine
the value of undertaking a full systematic review; to summarise and disseminate research findings;
to identify uncertainties to be addressed by a focused systematic review question; and to identify
research gaps (synthesis gaps) in the literature to position a subsequent systematic review
Hint: Look for databases used; use of reference lists; personal contact with experts; inclusion of
unpublished/published studies/non-English language studies, if appropriate
   stakeholders?
Hint: Consider whether review team asked stakeholders to suggest items for inclusion, used
stakeholders to establish the relevance of the scope or results, conducted a consultation exercise to
establish a future research agenda
6. Did the review authors          Yes/No/Cannot Tell
   assess the quality of the
   included studies?
Hint: This is not a formal requirement of a scoping review but if the review authors did assess quality
consider: how well was quality assessment performed and how did the review team use the results of
the assessments?
7. What is the overall quantity    Yes/No/Cannot Tell

=== p. 185 ===

Hint: Consider whether the review authors present total numbers of studies identified, within
meaningful sub-categories; discuss what might have been missed by the search strategy; assess
limitations of the search process and implications for the scoping process
    8. What is the overall quality    Yes/No/Cannot Tell
Hint: Consider whether the review authors present overall data on study quality or categorise study
designs within meaningful sub-categories; discuss what types of study/study designs have been
retrieved/missed by the search strategy; assess whether types of study retrieved by the search could
answer the review question.
    9. Do the review authors          Yes/No/Cannot Tell
       present the results of
       the scoping review using
       numerical, tabular and
       thematic approaches?
Hint: Consider whether data provided by the review authors allows exploration of multiple options for
finalisation of scope and their relative implications in terms of information yield and effort required
    statement of the
    implications of the evidence
    base for a future systematic
    review/further primary
    research, including potential
    boundaries for scope?
Hint: Consider whether the authors make recommendations for the conduct of a future systematic
review/primary research
11. Do the authors offer              Yes/No/Cannot Tell
    of a future systematic
    review/further primary
    research?
Hint: Consider whether the review authors suggest how a further review would be useful and can
identify specific contributions that a further review might make

Evidence summaries
It is helpful to identify published examples where someone has performed a quality assessment
of a published study, so investigate the journals and key organisations (grey literature) in your
discipline to see if they do.
     Examples include:

•       BMJ clinical evidence summaries | The BMJ (https://www.bmj.com/specialties/bmj-clinicalevidence-summaries)
•       Evidence Based Library and Information Practice (EBLIP) (https://journals.library.ualberta.
        ca/eblip/)

=== p. 186 ===

•     NICE (National Institute for Health Care and Excellence) Evidence Summaries | NICE advice
      | Our programmes | What we do | About | NICE (https://www.nice.org.uk/about/what-wedo/our-programmes/nice-advice/evidence-summaries)
•     Education Endowment Foundation Evidence summaries | Education Endowment Foundation
      | EEF(Toolkits) (https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/evidence-summaries/)

Quality assessment of qualitative research
Considerable debate surrounds the quality assessment of qualitative research as to whether it
can, or indeed should, be done. There is little consensus within qualitative research with
over a hundred sets of proposals on quality in qualitative research (Munthe-Kaas et al., 2019)
and widely opposing views. Essentially, two extremes exist: those who believe that concepts
used in quantitative research apply equally to qualitative research, without further interpretation (reliability, validity); and those who believe that there are no quality criteria by which
qualitative research can be assessed (Popay et al., 1998; Mays & Pope, 2020b). Further contention surrounds how best to approach quality assessment given evidence that it cannot be
performed reliably; results from quality assessment differed across three appraisal approaches
and six different reviewers (Dixon-Woods et al., 2007). In recent times, debate has shifted
from whether or not quality assessment should be done and towards what criteria should be
used (Carroll & Booth, 2015). A survey of 82 qualitative evidence syntheses (QES) published
between 1998 and 2008 (Hannes & Macaitis, 2012) found that critical appraisal had been
conducted in most cases, with only five reviews explicitly stating, and justifying, the absence
of critical appraisal. Limitations included a focus on reporting rather than conduct and the
presence of items that are separate from, or tangential to, consideration of study quality (e.g.
ethical approval).
    Cochrane Qualitative and Implementation Methods Group (CQIMG) guidance recommends that review authors should ‘distinguish between assessment of study quality and
assessment of risk of bias by focusing on assessment of methodological strengths and limitations as a marker of study rigour (a ‘risk to rigour’ approach)’ (Noyes et al., 2018a; 2021).
In the absence of a definitive risk to rigour tool, Cochrane further recommends that review
authors select from published, commonly used and validated (i.e. evaluated) tools that focus
on ‘the assessment of the methodological strengths and limitations of qualitative studies’. For details on quality assessment of qualitative research, read the highly cited CQIMG
Supplementary Guidance Paper 3 (Noyes et al., 2018a). This guidance informs Chapter 21 on
Qualitative Evidence from the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions
(Noyes et al., 2021).
    When undertaking quality assessment for your own qualitative review, you need to consider
which checklist to use (Table 6.9). One review identified almost 100 appraisal tools for assessing primary qualitative studies (Munthe-Kaas et al., 2019). A review of eight tools identified
six quality assessment/critical appraisal checklists (JBI, Popay, Walsh, ETQS, QF and CASP) (see
Table 6.11) (Majid & Vanstone, 2018). The remaining two tools (COREQ and SRQR) focus on the
quality of reporting, not on the appropriateness of methods used (see Chapter 8), a frequently
noted limitation (Carroll et al., 2012). Checklists have been criticised for focusing only upon
the ‘technical/mechanical management of the creation and sorting of data’ while ignoring the
‘value of the product of the research’ and failing to ‘address the originality, the substance, the

=== p. 187 ===

contribution, and the potential results to the actual topic—which is after all the purpose of the
project itself’ (Morse, 2021). Alternatively, brief prompts for quality assessment of qualitative
research have also been suggested (Dixon-Woods et al., 2004; 2006).

Table 6.11   Key quality assessment checklist resources – qualitative designs

                                Qualitative study design checklists

Critical Appraisal Skills Programme (CASP)        10 questions to help you make sense of a qualitative
                                                  research. Designed for reading single qualitative
https://casp-uk.net/wp-content/
                                                  research articles but extensively used in qualitative
uploads/2018/01/CASP-Qualitativeevidence syntheses
Checklist-2018.pdf

Evaluation Tool to assess the Quality of          38 unstructured questions organised under
qualitative research Studies (ETQS) (Long &       4 themes. Designed for qualitative evidence
Godfrey, 2004)                                    synthesis

Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI)                     Developed by JBI and collaborators and approved
                                                  by JBI Scientific Committee following extensive
https://joannabriggs.org/sites/default/
                                                  peer review. Designed for use in systematic reviews,
files/2020-08/Checklist_for_Qualitative_
                                                  but also used to create Critically Appraised Topics
Research.pdf
                                                  (CAT), in journal clubs and as an educational tool

National Institute for Health and Clinical        Designed for those with basic knowledge of
Excellence (NICE)                                 qualitative research. Used in producing public
                                                  health guidance. 14 questions with categorical
https://www.nice.org.uk/process/pmg4/
                                                  responses
chapter/appendix-h-quality-appraisal-checklistqualitative-studies#checklist-2

Popay (Popay et al., 1998)                        Designed for qualitative evidence synthesis.
                                                  Eight ‘markers’: findings illuminate subjective
                                                  meaning; iterative nature of research methods;
                                                  appropriateness of sample; adequate description
                                                  of findings; triangulation between data sources;
                                                  flow of data/examples; interpretation; and claims of
                                                  generalisability

Qualitative research (Dixon-Woods et al.,         Brief prompts for qualitative research designed for
2006)                                             experienced qualitative researchers

Quality Framework (Cabinet Office)                Exhaustive tool for social research compiled from
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/       literature review of quality assessment concepts
government-social-research-framework-forassessing-research-evidence

Specialist Unit for Review Evidence (SURE)        Adapted/updated from former Health Evidence
                                                  Bulletins Wales checklist with reference to NICE
https://www.cardiff.ac.uk/__data/assets/
                                                  Public Health Methods Manual (2012) and previous
pdf_file/0007/1142971/SURE-CA-form-forversions of Critical Appraisal Skills Programme
Qualitative_2018.pdf
                                                  (CASP) checklist

Walsh (Walsh & Downe, 2006)                       Designed for quality assessment in a qualitative
                                                  evidence synthesis, particularly for use in rapid
                                                  reviews in policy

=== p. 188 ===

  Second, reflect on why you plan to undertake quality assessment of qualitative research. The
review of 100 appraisal tools was looking for a tool to facilitate GRADE-CERQual ratings of
review findings (Munthe-Kaas et al., 2019). Examples exist where studies are excluded on the
basis of quality (Brunton et al., 2006); however, most qualitative reviews do not exclude studies
for that reason. You should be careful when using checklists to exclude studies from a review,
making sure that all exclusions are supported by an explicit account of the researcher’s view of
‘good’ and ‘bad’ studies, and reason for exclusions (Sandelowski et al., 1997). It is good practice
to look routinely at the effect on the review of both including and excluding poor-quality studies, so-called ‘qualitative sensitivity analysis’ (Carroll & Booth, 2015).
  Lastly, you should recognise that quality assessment of qualitative research is contested with
methods work still ongoing (Garside, 2014; Munthe-Kaas et al., 2019; Morse, 2021). Research
suggests that assessing qualitative studies for qualitative systematic reviews has little impact on
overall review findings – exclusion of weaker studies shows no effect (Thomas & Harden, 2008).
Exclusion of ‘inadequately reported’ studies from two exemplar reviews had no meaningful
effect on the synthesis (Carroll et al., 2012). However, in one of the reviews, on online education, excluding inadequately reported studies could lead to exclusion of the views of one particular
group of health professionals. For the moment, the main reason for assessing study quality for
qualitative syntheses appears to be that editors and peer reviewers expect that quality assessment should be reported.

Quality assessment for mixed methods reviews
Quality assessment for mixed methods reviews is particularly demanding. It requires that you
are familiar with the design features of both qualitative and quantitative methods with a knowledge of their strengths and weaknesses. You also need to consider the implications of bringing
the two study designs together; for example, participants who have already been recruited to a
trial may reflect distinctive attitudes or values if subsequently asked about their experience of
a particular condition. Quality assessment of mixed methods studies is covered in Chapter 9.
For the moment, it suffices to highlight three main options: using an all-in-one checklist, using
compatible checklists from the same stable (from the analogy of a string of race horses) or using
the ‘best of class’ checklist for each study (Table 6.12) (Noyes et al., 2019).

Table 6.12 Three options for quality assessment in mixed methods reviews

Option                             Strengths                         Weaknesses

‘All-In-One Checklist’ (e.g. the   Looks at individual study         Uses scoring system
Mixed Methods Appraisal Tool       features and also effect of
(MMAT))                            integration

‘Same Stable Checklists’           Harnesses compatible              Designed as ‘reader’s
(e.g. CASP (RCTs) and CASP         checklist structures to aid       checklists’ and do not reflect
(Qualitative))                     cross-study comparison            state of the art

‘Best of Class Checklists’ (e.g.   Uses current best options for     Not designed for compatibility
Cochrane Risk of Bias for RCTs     each individual study             and integration of designs
and JBI for Qualitative)                                             is ignored

=== p. 189 ===

Applying quality assessment
Quality assessment of studies generates large quantities of information. Typically, in systematic
reviews where quality assessment is the default, the Results section presents a few paragraphs
that attempt to synthesise information on overall study quality, focusing on its impact on individual study findings. The information can also be tabulated by drawing out the key points
of the checklist. Generally, the Discussion focuses on the key flaws, but you should not forget
to include what has been done well! As mentioned previously, you should be aware of which
flaws are critical and which are not – remember that it is the impact on the study findings that
is crucial.
  Reviewers do not generally exclude studies on the basis of quality. However, sometimes they
perform a subgroup analysis to examine whether the results change if poor-quality studies
are omitted (i.e. are results sensitive to study quality?). This form of subgroup analysis is usually
referred to as a sensitivity analysis. Subgroup analysis may also be performed by splitting the
studies into subgroups according to a particular study design feature that might impact on study
findings, for example the country in which the study was undertaken or studies with large and
small sample sizes, and exploring how these aspects of studies might impact on the findings of
the review. For example, smaller studies may overestimate study findings (Higgins et al., 2021)
and subgroup analysis has the potential to demonstrate this.
  Finally, be cautious about labelling studies according to a level of quality (e.g. high, medium
and low). While in principle this might appear useful, you need to be explicit about the criteria
by which studies are categorised, so that ultimately the classification of studies could be reliably
reproduced. Given this may be a highly subjective exercise, you do not want to mislead your
audience as their concept of a high-quality study may differ from your own.

Issues and challenges in quality assessment
Assessing the quality of research is time consuming, particularly when you are new to the
process. With experience, you become quicker as you become more familiar with the study
designs and their inherent and anticipated weaknesses. You may also find it difficult to choose
a checklist given the number from which to choose. As discussed earlier, you could examine
examples of reviews in your subject area to identify common and well-used checklists for your
research discipline.
  Quality assessment is a subjective process. For systematic reviews, methods guides suggest
that quality assessment should be carried out by more than one person and the results compared (Higgins et al., 2021). However, this is not always practical or necessary. Having a second
reviewer check a sample of quality assessments offers a reasonable alternative, particularly for
those elements of which you are unsure (with a supervisor or mentor perhaps). Use of checklists
typically makes it easier to achieve consensus. As previously stated, fundamental issues concerning the subjectivity of quality assessment of qualitative research remain to be resolved.
  Lastly, remember that quality assessment examines what is reported within a study report,
and thus studies can only be as good as their reporting. Often studies do not report enough
details of the methods employed and quality assessment can only measure what is reported.
While it is possible to track authors down to elicit missing details, a good paper should include
sufficient detail to allow you to assess its quality. The quality of reporting of primary and

=== p. 190 ===

secondary research (see Chapter 10) has been a subject of attention. The EQUATOR Network
provides a comprehensive list of reporting guidelines (www.equator-network.org/ see Box 10.5).
Over time, as more journals adopt standards for reporting the studies they publish, quality
assessment should become easier – assuming that standardised reporting does not conceal more
than it reveals, by making it difficult to identify poorer studies.
  Use Exercise 6.5 to practise your quality assessment skills.

   Quality assessment
   In Table 6.13, three articles and their citations are presented for you to test out your quality
   assessment skills. Each of the three articles is open access and therefore freely available
   online.
        We have selected articles that report different study designs and different topics. Skills
   that you acquire from undertaking this exercise will transfer to assessing studies from other
   disciplines, including your own.
        First, read the full article and undertake a quality assessment using an appropriate checklist (suggested checklists are provided in Tables 6.9 and 6.10). Then look at the model answers
   for each article on the companion website. Based on the suggested checklists, see if you have
   identified the key points. Try to undertake the exercise before looking at the corresponding
   model answers! Then look to see whether you have identified the key points. Do not worry if
   some of your judgements disagree with the sample answers. Disagreements over the quality
   of individual studies can, and frequently do, happen within systematic review teams. This is
   why two reviewers make initial judgements, discuss discrepancies and, where agreement cannot be reached, a third reviewer acts as adjudicator to reach a final, agreed judgement. You
   are likely to have identified points that our sample answers have overlooked.

Table 6.13 Quality assessment of an article

Study reference                                Study design   Checklist
Chocolate flavanols and skin                   RCT            Critical Appraisal Skills Programme:
photoprotection: a parallel, double-blind,                    https://casp-uk.net/wp-content/
randomized clinical trial. (Mogollon et al.,                  uploads/2018/01/CASP-Randomised2014)                                                         Controlled-Trial-Checklist-2018.pdf
Dying to be famous: retrospective cohort       Cohort study   Critical Appraisal Skills Programme:
study of rock and pop star mortality and                      https://casp-uk.net/wp-content/
its association with adverse childhood                        uploads/2018/01/CASP-Qualitativeexperiences (Bellis et al., 2012)                             Checklist-2018.pdf
Robotic seals as therapeutic tools in an       Qualitative    Critical Appraisal Skills Programme:
aged care facility: a qualitative study        study          https://casp-uk.net/wp-content/
(Birks et al., 2016)                                          uploads/2018/01/CASP-Cohort-StudyChecklist_2018.pdf

=== p. 191 ===

SUMMARY
All literature reviews involve an assessment of the evidence base. The first step is to select systematically those studies identified by the literature search that are relevant to your review
question. The type of review that you are undertaking and its purpose will determine the
approach you will use to assess the included studies in your literature review. For some reviews,
you may briefly characterise the key features of the evidence base. In other reviews, you need
to conduct an in-depth assessment of study quality to address the review question. Checklists
that elicit a Yes/No/Cannot Tell response to questions can help you to accomplish this process,
particularly if you are a novice reviewer. An experienced reviewer may progress to responding
to a series of prompts. In both instances it is important to document the individual judgements
and to use these assessments when interpreting the review findings. Many useful resources exist
to support the quality assessment process. Quality assessment is, initially at least, a difficult and
time-consuming process, although it does become easier with experience and practice. However,
be sure to persevere as the process often alerts you to methodological flaws in studies included
in a review. You may be surprised (or even shocked!) at the potential impact of a flawed study on
the findings and conclusions of your review.

                      key learning points

   • Use the inclusion and exclusion criteria you devised in Chapter 4 to help you select studies
     for your review in a transparent manner.
   • Consider the extent to which you need to assess the evidence base for your review by
     thinking about the aim of your review.
   • Consider how the design features of studies included in your review can impact upon the
     research findings.
   • Three core components of quality assessment to consider when reading a study are:

      �   Are the results of a study true? (Validity)
      �   What are the results? (Reliability)
      �   Can I generalise the results? (Generalisability)

   • Quality assessment checklists help to guide the process of quality and relevance assessment.
   • Look at research within your discipline, particularly reviews, to see how quality assessment is undertaken in your topic area.

                      frequently asked questions (FAQS)

   FAQ 6.1 I am unsure whether to include a study in my review, what can I do?
   You could ask for a second opinion, for example from your supervisor or mentor. Alternatively,
   you could hand a colleague your inclusion and exclusion criteria and ask them to apply these
   to the study in question to see what decision they reach. Systematic reviews being conducted by research teams, particularly those that are funded, would double-screen at least

=== p. 192 ===

  a proportion of the studies, therefore any uncertainty can usually be resolved, including the
  opinion of a third reviewer/colleague if required.

  FAQ 6.2 Do I need to record a reason for all the studies I exclude?
  It will help to record the reasons for exclusion at each stage of screening. This will then help
  you to report how many studies were excluded at the title and abstract screen, and how
  many studies were recorded at the full-text screen. For your write-up, you only need to record
  reasons for any studies you exclude at full text. Systematic reviews usually include in the
  appendices a list of these with a (brief) reason for why they did not meet the inclusion criteria
  (such as incorrect population).

  FAQ 6.3 How do I keep track of what I have included and excluded and at
  what stage?
  The important thing is to have a system, whether manual or electronic. Reference management tools can help, as you can tag or label references accordingly as you go through the
  selection process – such as include-abstract or exclude-full-text. You can then retrieve lists
  based on the various tags/labels, for example to generate a list of excluded at full text studies
  for your appendices. Free software exists to help with the review process, for example Rayyan.
  Many reviewers use home-made solutions such as Excel spreadsheets with drop-down menus,
  importing references into the spreadsheet, so that they can filter and sort on inclusion/exclusion criteria and perform quick counts according to record status (Include/Exclude/Proceed
  to Full Text etc.) If you have access to systematic review software via your institution, or can
  afford to include it in the budget for your review, ‘keeping track’ is built into these programmes.

  FAQ 6.4 I am unsure how much effort I will need to spend on quality assessment
  and how I should approach it for my review?
  Refer to Table 6.1 as a starting point. You will find it helpful to look at reviews of a similar
  type (e.g. so if planning a scoping review, look at existing scoping reviews) and reviews in
  your topic (to identify subject-specific checklists or to see if researchers have used/adapted
  generic checklists). The Systematic Review Toolbox (www.systematicreviewtools.com) is a
  good source of quality assessment checklists and guidelines covering different disciplines.

  FAQ 6.5 I am critically appraising a systematic review and I want to assess the
  issue of heterogeneity, whereabouts in the review should I look for this?
  Reviewers may describe how they planned to deal with heterogeneity upfront in the Methods
  section. Also, check the Results section to see how they handled heterogeneity in practice.
  If the review presents a meta-analysis, you can check the forest plot to see whether it was
  appropriate to combine the results of the individual studies. A useful ‘Anatomy of a Systematic
  Review’ (National Collaborating Centre for Methods and Tools, 2017) tool will assist you when
  analysing others’ reviews.

  FAQ 6.6 Can I combine my data extraction with my quality assessment, so I
  don’t need to read each study twice?
  It is possible to record the data extraction and quality assessment together, and in the same
  data extraction repository (e.g. an Excel file or Word table). Various examples exist, including
  sample data extraction forms from the Cochrane Collaboration Developmental, Psychosocial
  and Learning Problems group: https://dplp.cochrane.org/data-extraction-forms. It really is a

=== p. 193 ===

   matter of choice and what you find best for you. With any data extraction form, whether including critical appraisal or not, it is useful to pilot it first before using it throughout your review.

Get more hands-on guidance!
Visit https://study.sagepub.com/booth3e for downloadable versions of the exercises, as
well as some suggested answers. You can also access a glossary, literature review templates,
source trackers, and a collated list of online tools to help you put together a successful
literature review.

                      suggestions for further information

   Ajetunmobi O (2002) Making Sense of Critical Appraisal. London: Arnold.
   A useful book with a chapter on appraising each key study design. Read the chapter(s) that
   cover the study designs of your evidence base. New edition (2nd) planned for January 2021.

   Aveyard H (2018) How do I critically appraise the literature? In: Doing a Literature Review in
       Health and Social Care, 4th edition. Maidenhead: Open University Press, 75–123.
   This chapter gives an overview of critical appraisal. Particularly helpful is the ‘six questions to
   trigger critical thinking’. Appraisal of a variety of information types is covered – quantitative
   and qualitative research, theory, practice literature, policy and guidelines, and information
   on websites.

   Greenhalgh J & Brown T (2017) Quality assessment: where do I begin? In: Boland A, Cherry MG
      & Dickson R, Doing a Systematic Review, 2nd edition. London: Sage, 107–30.
   This chapter covers the process of quality assessment from beginning to end, in a 6-step guide.

   Greenhalgh T (2019) How to Read a Paper: The Basics of Evidence-Based Medicine and
      Healthcare, 6th edition. Oxford: Wiley Blackwell.
   Now in its 6th edition, this essential book gives an overview of the evidence-based medicine
   process. Chapter 3, ‘Getting your bearings: what is this paper about?’, provides an introduction to quality assessment, before moving on to a chapter on assessing methodological quality
   (Chapter 4). Chapter 5, ‘Statistics for the non-statistician’, is particularly useful for familiaris-ing yourself with the key statistical aspects of studies to inform your critical appraisal.

   Oliver P (2012) How to select literature for inclusion. In: Succeeding with Your Literature
       Review. Maidenhead: Open University Press, 58–74.
   A good introduction to quality assessment, does not cover formal critical appraisal, but highlights issues to consider when selecting studies to include in your review.

   Porritt K, Gomersall J & Lockwood C (2014) JBI’s systematic reviews: study selection and critical appraisal. American Journal of Nursing, 114(6): 47–52.
   Part of a series presenting a step-by-step guide to systematic review, this article focuses on
   study selection and critical appraisal, with the aim of ensuring that your review produces valid
   results capable of providing a useful basis for informing policy, clinical practice and future
   research. The article helpfully presents appraising evidence of effectiveness (quantitative
   studies) and appraising evidence of experiences (qualitative studies).

