=== chunk: booth-sutton-2022-systematic-approaches/ch8-qualitative-synthesis ===
title: Synthesising and Analysing Qualitative Studies
source_pdf: docs/sources/booth-sutton-2022-systematic-approaches/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 270-308
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 235
plan_page_end: 273
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 235 ===

       SYNTHESISING AND
     ANALYSING QUALITATIVE
            STUDIES

                in a nutshell

How to synthesise and analyse qualitative studies
• Typically, you summarise qualitative data as themes or constructs.
• You can also summarise and synthesise qualitative data using narrative, tables and, sometimes, graphics.
• When choosing your method of synthesis you need to balance the need to aggregate (bring
  studies together) with the need to interpret (make sense of findings from the studies).
• You should also consider whether your focus is on the literature as a body of work, on the
  individual studies or on themes or findings within those studies.
• If you plan to integrate your qualitative synthesis with a quantitative review you must
  consider in advance how to bring the two reviews together (see Chapter 9).

                 key terms explained

   aggregative: review approach concerned with assembling and pooling data (either
   quantitative as with meta-analysis or qualitative as with thematic synthesis). Compare
   configurative, a review approach that addresses open questions, typically answered with

=== p. 236 ===

      qualitative data and iterative, by examining experiences and meaning to generate and
      explore theory.

      disconfirming case: analytic strategy to protect against generalisation or caricature
      when synthesising qualitative evidence. The search for disconfirming evidence, or negative cases, offers a valuable strategy for assessing the credibility or validity of qualitative
      research claims.

      meta-ethnography: interpretive approach that aims to provide a new interpretation of
      studies or a new theory to explain research findings encountered, rather than a simple
      aggregation.

      qualitative evidence synthesis: umbrella term, as promoted by the Cochrane Qualitative
      and Implementation Methods Group, for methodologies associated with the systematic
      review of qualitative research, conducted either as a stand-alone review or as part of a
      review of complex interventions, systems or for guideline development.

      SPICE (Setting–Perspective–Interest, phenomenon of Comparison–Evaluation): structured
      approach to formulation of qualitative questions that builds upon the PICO acronym; the
      Population component is split into Setting and Perspective and the Outcomes component
      is replaced with the more inclusive Evaluation component to incorporate concepts such as
      outputs and impact.

INTRODUCTION
Qualitative methods allow you to gather detailed and specific information and, most importantly, go beyond statistical associations by investigating how complex mechanisms operate
in different contexts (Miles et al., 2018). Qualitative synthesis involves identifying patterns
within your data – patterns related to concepts, ideas or themes rather than to numbers
or trends. A qualitative review seeks to identify commonalities across data and, equally
importantly, looks for exceptions to an overall pattern or ‘rule’ (Booth et al., 2013b). You
must recognise that the value of your review does not lie in merely identifying and bringing
together related studies. By juxtaposing findings from different sources (putting them side by
side) you may spot patterns or themes not previously recognised by the authors of individual
studies. Furthermore, you may integrate your data to produce a new explanation or theory
to explain why findings differ under different circumstances (Durach et al., 2017). Bear in
mind, too, that you may not only spot patterns in the collective findings (what the individual
authors found) but also notice differences that are explained by how researchers have carried
out the individual studies (meta-method). Differences in methods used by included studies
may explain inconsistencies in their findings or, ultimately, suggest how best to conduct such
studies in the future.
  A key principle of any synthesis is ‘making a new whole out of the parts’ (Cruzes & Dybå,
2011b). This ‘new whole’ may form a new line of argument, a new theory or a new ‘take home
message’. You can rearrange conceptual ‘building blocks’ (studies or findings) within an existing fabrication (e.g. a theory or framework) (Booth & Carroll, 2015b), integrate them with new
studies or use them to produce an entirely new construction (Anderson et al., 2013; Brunton,
2017; Brunton et al., 2020).

=== p. 237 ===

  This chapter starts by rehearsing the generic stages of a qualitative evidence synthesis (QES)
before focusing attention on choice of synthesis and the procedures of basic and advanced
synthesis and analysis. Featuring three main types of qualitative synthesis, namely thematic
synthesis, framework synthesis and meta-ethnography, it then focuses attention on
new forms of synthesis including rapid QES and reviews of qualitative reviews (namely, mega-aggregation and mega-ethnography).

Synthesis–analysis: an iterative process
Although some forms of qualitative synthesis, such as meta-aggregation, follow a linear process, it is more common for synthesis and analysis to be iterative (Garside, 2008). You may
generate an initial finding. You might then confirm the presence of this finding in the existing
data using some analytical technique. Many analytical techniques are common to multiple
types of synthesis. The distinction between synthesis and analysis is clearest when we define the
tools available for each of these two stages.

OVERVIEW OF APPROACHES TO QUALITATIVE SYNTHESIS
As mentioned in Chapter 7, synthesis relies heavily on pattern recognition. Techniques such
as analogy (looking for similarities between different phenomena), metaphor (thinking about
one thing as if it were the same as another) and homology (looking for direct and corresponding
relationships between natural and synthetic structures) translate readily to evidence synthesis
(Tranfield et al., 2003). Other useful techniques include comparison and contrast (Gilson, 2014;
Gray & Malins, 2016). In Box 8.1 we illustrate these principles in a familiar setting.

   A simple illustration of qualitative synthesis
   Ask your colleagues to provide three phrases to describe their perfect holiday. Some may
   be clear and specific (e.g. ‘good waves for windsurfing’). This example holds little possibility
   for confusion although they may need to clarify what waves this requires. What, however, if
   two or more colleagues use such phrases as ‘good weather’? Clearly this differs between settings (e.g. temperate versus tropical) and types of holiday (beach versus skiing). You would
   need to clarify whether these colleagues have similar or different ideas in mind. Alternatively,
   where colleagues use different terminology (e.g. ‘many places of interest’ and ‘rich cultural
   heritage’), you need to establish whether these phrases ‘translate’ into the same concept or
   idea. If by ‘many places of interest’ one colleague means restaurants, bars and nightclubs it is
   unlikely that the two phrases translate into each other! Of course, the difficulty of this process
   is compounded for published studies because you cannot usually go back to your informants
   to clarify what was meant.

=== p. 238 ===

Aggregative, configurative or integrative?
Drawing together findings from multiple qualitative studies is increasingly common as
an important source of evidence to support policy and practice (Classen & Alvarez, 2015).
Approaches to synthesis can be aggregative, configurative or integrative (Kastner et al.,
2016). Aggregative synthesis is ‘stocktaking’, as typified in mapping exercises. Aggregative
synthesis answers such questions as: What are the main study designs used to investigate the
focus of interest? What are the principal themes across multiple studies? Are any populations
poorly represented, or not represented, at all across studies?
  Configurative synthesis involves capturing a ‘rounded’ picture of the focus of interest.
Configurative synthesis addresses such questions as: How do the individual themes identified
across studies relate to each another? Do my explanations for the focus of interest capture all
important perspectives? Do the studies agree with each other or can I detect areas of disagreement
(dissonance)?
  Integrative synthesis brings together different types of data (either different types of qualitative data or data from quantitative and qualitative studies) such as integrating thematic data
with responses from surveys. Chapter 9 focuses on integration of quantitative and qualitative
studies or integration of quantitative and qualitative data within those studies (Noyes et al.,
2019).
  Approaches to synthesising qualitative research include meta-narrative, critical interpretative synthesis, meta-study, meta-ethnography, grounded theory, thematic synthesis, textual narrative synthesis and framework synthesis, and ecological triangulation
(Booth et al., 2016; 2018). The novice researcher faces a bewildering choice! Guidance on how
to choose synthesis methods is structured around the RETREAT mnemonic (Booth et al., 2016;
2018b) (Box 8.2) (see also Chapter 3).

   The RETREAT mnemonic for choosing a review type

      Research question

      Epistemology

      Time/timeframe

      Resources

      Expertise

      Audience and purpose

      Type of data

Before we walk you through a generic process for a qualitative synthesis we suggest that you
familiarise yourself with a published example (Exercise 8.1). Debate exists on the extent to

=== p. 239 ===

which a qualitative evidence synthesis resembles other systematic reviews or whether it’s pedigree derives more from primary qualitative research methods (Booth, 2018).

   Navigating around a qualitative evidence synthesis (QES)
   Find an example of a qualitative evidence synthesis/qualitative systematic review. Use either
   the reading guide by Tong et al. (2016) or the SBU (2019) Tool to assess methodological limitations of qualitative evidence synthesis (https://www.sbu.se/contentassets/14570b8112c5464
   cbb2c256c11674025/methodological_limitations_qualitative_evidence_synthesis.pdf) to read
   critically the example you have found. Bearing in mind that the journey is more important
   than your destination, answer:

   1. Are the methods of your chosen example of a QES well reported?
   2. Is this a good example of a published QES?
   3. What single improvement would you make to the methods of this particular QES? (You
      may want to return to this question after having read the whole of this chapter.)

A STEP-BY-STEP GUIDE TO QUALITATIVE SYNTHESIS
As with other systematic approaches, qualitative syntheses start by focusing the question (see
Chapter 4) and searching and screening the literature (see Chapter 5). These processes are covered in detail in the referenced chapters and are mentioned only briefly below.

Step 1 – Formulating the question
Although you can formulate a question for qualitative synthesis using the generic PICO
(Population–Intervention–Comparison–Outcome) framework, some commentators suggest that
it is more appropriate to use a variant of PICO (Harris et al., 2018). SPICE breaks Population
into Setting and Perspective, replaces Intervention with focus of Interest and Outcome as the
wider-ranging Evaluation (Booth, 2016). SPIDER accommodates qualitative and mixed methods questions (Sample, Phenomenon of Interest, Design, Evaluation, Research type) (Cooke
et al., 2012). A recent addition, PerSPE(c)TiF (Perspective–Setting–Phenomenon of interest/
Problem–Environment–(optional Comparison)–Time/timing–Findings) consolidates elements
from existing question frameworks (Booth et al., 2019b). Regardless of the framework used
you should structure your review question (see Chapter 4) to shape the subsequent search,
inclusion/exclusion and data extraction processes. You should involve stakeholders from the
very beginning and throughout your entire review (Harris et al., 2015; Bayliss et al., 2016;
Downe et al., 2019).

=== p. 240 ===

Steps 2 and 3 – Searching and screening the literature
In comparison with identification of quantitative studies (see Chapter 5), search procedures
for retrieval of qualitative research remain relatively underdeveloped (DeJean et al., 2016).
Particular challenges are associated with non-informative titles and abstracts, diffuse terminology, poor indexing and the predominance of quantitative studies in databases (Booth et al.,
2016). You could start planning your search using the 7S framework (Noyes et al., 2021)
(Table 8.1). This characterises important considerations from sampling and sources through
structured questions, search procedures, strategies and filters and supplementary strategies to
standards for reporting (Booth et al., 2016).

Table 8.1   The 7S framework for qualitative searching

Component                 Starting principles
Sampling                  Where approaches other than comprehensive sampling are used,
                          reviewers must justify their sampling strategy, match it to their
                          synthesis method and describe fully how it was implemented
Sources                   For health topics, MEDLINE and CINAHL (Rogers et al., 2018) are
                          considered a minimum, augmented by topic-specific and setting-specific sources (Stansfield et al., 2012). Devise specific strategies to find
                          specific types of grey literature, where included
Structured questions      Your question structure should match the purpose and focus of the
                          review. When paired with an intervention review, the qualitative question
                          may be coterminous or could seek broader aspects of the focus of interest
Search procedures         Given comparatively low yield of qualitative topic-based searches,
                          reviewers should privilege specificity (retrieval of relevant items).
                          You can use relevant items to develop supplementary search strategies.
                          You should compensate for indexing deficiencies using well-chosen
                          supplementary strategies
Search strategies and     Filters should match the intended purpose of the review (Rosumeck
filters                   et al., 2020; Wagner et al., 2020). When extensive supplementary
                          strategies are used to improve sensitivity, topic-based searches may
                          use a simple filter (using terms such as qualitative OR findings OR
                          interview) (Rogers et al., 2018)
Supplementary             Reference checking is a default for every review. For diffuse topics,
strategies                or those with significant variation in terminology, tables of contents,
                          citation searching or contact with authors/experts may be productive.
                          Where context or theory is important, the CLUSTER method may
                          be appropriate. Study identifiers may be useful for sibling or kinship
Standards                 In the absence of a consensual standard for reporting, you should use
                          ENTREQ, eMERGe supplemented by PRISMA and STARLITE to report
                          your search

  Determining which studies to include, based on consensus from two reviewers, enhances rig-our (Atkins et al., 2008). For example, will you include mixed methods studies with a qualitative
component or not? Will you include data from free text responses to surveys? You may use two
reviewers to reach consensus on screening decisions, resolving conflicts through discussion or
by consulting a third reviewer (Atkins et al., 2008).

=== p. 241 ===

Step 4 – Extracting qualitative data for your review
Data extraction precedes synthesis and is key to demonstrating that you have followed a systematic approach:

      Standardized data extraction approaches and forms are essential in minimizing error, providing a historical record of decisions made about the data, and establishing a data set for
      subsequent synthesis. (Munn et al., 2014)

When extracting data you systematically identify information relevant to the review question
(Finfgeld-Connett, 2018b). Remember that you are trying to ensure that you handle different
studies, with their different designs and publishing conventions, in a consistent manner. You
should decide which data to extract and how to do this (Finfgeld-Connett & Johnson, 2018).
Data extraction requires that you pre-specify, and then examine, which elements of data are
present in each individual report (Munn et al., 2014). Think how the data you extract relates to
your review question. The Cochrane guidance (Noyes et al., 2018a) suggests four approaches to
data extraction:

1.     Using a standardised, or adapted, data extraction template.
2.     Using an a priori extraction conceptual framework.
3.     Using a software program (e.g. NVivo) (Houghton et al., 2017) to inductively code original
       studies.
4.     Using a logic model of the programme theory to inform data extraction, analysis and synthesis.

Data extraction forms require a descriptive section that mirrors your focused question (e.g.
SPICE or PerSPE(c)TiF – see Chapter 4), to capture the setting, the perspective, the intervention/
focus of interest as well as characteristics of the population sample. Beyond the generic SPICE
format your data extraction is shaped by your method of synthesis. For framework synthesis
your framework may be a conceptual model, logic model or pathway of care (Booth & Carroll,
2015b) from which your data extraction form will accommodate concepts and sub-concepts.
Allow extra unlabelled fields for uncoded data to which you will subsequently return. Your challenge is to balance the granularity of the data extraction form with the quantities of relevant
data (Brunton et al., 2020); you do not want either ‘just-in-case’ empty fields or large quantities
of data lumped under broad labels.
     Interpretive reviews challenge conventional data extraction. The raw data of a qualitative systematic review is ideas or concepts. Ideas or concepts are not uniquely found within
the Results section of a primary study. Novel thinking may appear in the Discussion and
Conclusion sections (Noyes et al., 2018a). When synthesising qualitative research, reread
the original findings to compare emerging ideas with the concepts as originally written.
Continually look out for overlap, similarities and contradictions (Mays & Pope, 2020a). Your
data extraction form should stimulate insights and interpretation. Use different ways of
extracting and juxtaposing concepts (coding original papers, tabulation, mind maps, colour
coding, short text descriptions, etc.). Rather than deciding everything in advance, revisit your
forms and data continuously as new interpretations emerge. You should also seek to highlight
information about contextual factors from included studies to explain differences across studies
(Booth et al., 2019a).

=== p. 242 ===

    The value of data extraction for qualitative research depends upon whether the overall intent
is aggregative (bringing multiple studies together in a common format to facilitate assimilation and summing up) or interpretive (where data extraction is enhanced by creative techniques to optimise the explanatory value of the data). The units of extraction in this case are
specific findings and illustrative excerpts from the text.

Step 5 – Quality assessment (appraisal)
Quality assessment of qualitative research is contentious, both on how it is best conducted and,
indeed, on whether it should be undertaken at all! Quality, in the context of qualitative research,
is considered elusive (Toye et al., 2013). Nevertheless, peer reviewers and editors typically expect
all systematic reviews to assess quality, making compliance the path of least resistance. When
seeking to establish the confidence or certainty associated with research findings (such as GRADE-CERQual), quality assessment of methodological limitations becomes essential (Munthe-Kaas et al.,
2018; 2019). Excluding an entire study on the basis of an appraisal of study quality may not be
appropriate (Dixon-Woods et al., 2004), particularly if it contributes an important insight:

      the ‘study’ is not the appropriate unit of analysis for quality appraisal in research synthesis.
      There are often nuggets of wisdom in methodologically weak studies and systematic review
      disregards them at its peril. (Pawson, 2006c)

Tools for quality assessment are described in more detail in Chapter 6. The Critical Appraisal
Skills Programme (CASP) checklist for qualitative studies has become ubiquitous (Hannes et
al., 2010). Meanwhile, the Qualitative Assessment and Review Instrument designed by Joanna
Briggs (JBI-QARI) (Hannes et al., 2010; Toye et al., 2013) and the Quality of Reporting Tool
(Carroll et al., 2013) have gained traction within meta-aggregation and best fit framework synthesis respectively. Current appraisal checklists highlight valid concerns about
inconsistent judgements and an inherently subjective appraisal process (Toye et al., 2013;
Delefosse et al., 2015; Morse, 2021; Morse, in press). Noticeably, no tool is currently designed
for assessing studies for inclusion within a meta-ethnography. The Cochrane Qualitative and
Implementation Methods Group has issued guidance on how to select appropriate instruments
and criteria (Noyes et al., 2018a).

Step 6 – Synthesis
A key early stage is planning your initial synthesis strategy – how to approach the literature
once you have assembled it (Petticrew et al., 2013b). You may, in fact, need to switch from your
initial strategy (Box 8.4) to an appropriate alternative as patterns from the literature become
clearer. Whatever methods of synthesis you use you will:

•     map similarity,
•     ensure that categories are exclusive and avoid overlap, and
•     create secure and well-defined concepts as the building blocks of your process.
•     These procedures will enable you to create a taxonomy, produce a framework or meta-framework, develop a coding scheme or generate a thematic synthesis.

=== p. 243 ===

Synthesis and analysis form a substantive part of the remainder of this chapter. We will focus
only on how to get started with each activity in this introductory section. Broadly speaking
synthesis and analysis requires:

1.    Initial assessment of study reports
2.    Analysis and synthesis
3.    Preliminary analysis and interpretation
4.    Full analysis and interpretation.

     Planning your synthesis strategy
     1. Decide whether to read swiftly through all papers or to work through papers in detail one by one.
     2. Decide how you will document contents of individual papers (memos, notes, structured form).
     3. Select a starting paper (e.g. index paper – according to age, conceptual richness, number of
        citations, source discipline, etc.).
     4. Decide how you will tackle subsequent papers (chronological, purposive sampling, maximum
        variation sampling, etc.).
     5. Construct cross-case comparisons across the set of papers (e.g. tabulation etc.).

While you may need to refine and change your initial synthesis strategy, you nevertheless need
a clear direction of travel. Clearly if you intend to read and review an entire body of literature
it will not matter in which order you handle the papers; you will categorise data from each
additional paper which will be compared with data from previous papers, using the constant
comparative method. If, however, you are planning to sample purposively from the literature
(Combs et al., 2010) then you need to be confident that you have constructed your sampling
frame appropriately (Benoot et al., 2016; Ames et al., 2019a).

Step 7 – Analysis and interpretation
Analysis and synthesis involve further reading and rereading of study reports. Preliminary
analysis and interpretation move forward from considering studies as individual reports
towards examining them as a body of evidence. You start to categorise the findings from the
studies. Your challenge is to extract findings from these studies without losing the context
and relationships within each report. You may find that the techniques of narrative synthesis
covered in Chapter 7 (e.g. mind maps, logic models, tabulation, etc.) help to make sense of
qualitative studies and to explore the presence of patterns. At this stage, start to look for patterns
both within and between studies. Detailed reading allows you to focus on technical aspects of
the reporting and to start thinking about whether methods used are appropriate. You need not
implement a hierarchy of study designs (Petticrew & Roberts, 2003) but rather consider whether
each method is suitable for the research question under examination.

=== p. 244 ===

     Full analysis and interpretation move you beyond the elementary synthesis techniques
used in the preliminary stages to formal methods of synthesis such as thematic synthesis, framework synthesis or meta-ethnography. Three synthesis approaches are particularly useful (Suri,
2013; Benoot et al., 2016):

•      Pursuing a line of argument.
•      Examining consistencies.
•      Identifying the disconfirming case.

By engaging with findings at this depth you will be able to spot meta-level characteristics – for
example, how findings have been informed by a particular research tradition or how concepts
have developed over time (Barnett-Page & Thomas, 2009). You may reveal incompatibility between certain theoretical or ideological stances. For example, our study of community
engagement exposed a divide between top-down governmental approaches and participatory
bottom-up approaches (Harris et al., 2015).
     At this stage you can start to consider how your findings are influenced by study quality.
While synthesis steers the reader towards patterns of similarity you should be particularly active
in seeking the divergent or disconfirming case (Booth et al., 2013a). Where the data is sufficiently rich you may proceed to theory development – perhaps by constructing if–then causal
chains or logic models (Kneale et al., 2015).

Data presentation
How review findings are defined and presented depends on the review question, the synthesis
methods used, the intended purpose or audience of the synthesis, and the richness of the data
available (Gough et al., 2017). Typically, a formative presentation might include ‘literature
review maps/diagrams, matrices, or outlines that indicate main themes, subthemes, categories,
subcategories, patterns and sequencing of ideas’ (Combs et al., 2010) to illustrate work in progress. In contrast a summative presentation helps the intended audience make sense of the
completed review’s findings and key take home messages (Leary & Walker, 2018).
     Further detail on summative presentation is discussed later in the chapter in the section on
writing up and presenting review findings (see also Chapter 10).

GETTING STARTED IN QUALITATIVE SYNTHESIS
A previous publication identified 15 qualitative approaches to research synthesis (Booth et al.,
2018). Our list excluded critical interpretive synthesis (Snilstveit et al., 2012) and realist
synthesis which feature as mixed methods approaches in Chapter 9. However, as with the
main review types, we can limit the 15 approaches – in this case to a four-item QES Survival Kit!
(See Box 8.4.)
     QES Survival Kit

=== p. 245 ===

Guidance from the Cochrane Collaboration (Noyes et al., 2021) and the World Health
Organization (Flemming et al., 2019) seeks to further simplify the choice to three methods: thematic synthesis, framework synthesis and meta-ethnography. Collectively, they identify
all three methods under the umbrella term – qualitative evidence synthesis (QES). Thematic
synthesis, based on thematic analysis methods used in primary research, remains one of the
most accessible methods of qualitative synthesis. Framework synthesis, adapted from framework analysis, begins with an a priori conceptual framework, which develops iteratively as
new data is incorporated and themes are derived from the data. Meta-ethnography, likened to
grounded theory approaches, represents the most ambitious of the three methods and moves
explicitly towards the generation of theory. The Campbell Collaboration adds a further method,
popularised by the Joanna Briggs Institute, namely meta-aggregation (see Hannes & Lockwood,
2011b). Meta-aggregation is ‘a process that identifies meanings from qualitative studies that may
be from different methodologies and further abstracts those meanings into categories that are
then synthesized’ (Tufanuru, 2015). It ‘seeks to generate summaries to determine the value of the
findings of individual studies in terms of their practical consequences’ (Hannes & Pearson, 2012).
     Recent years have witnessed attempts to move beyond merely documenting methods to
identifying which method of synthesis is most appropriate under what circumstances (Booth
et al., 2016; 2018b). It is useful to read the experiences of self-declared novice researchers when
attempting these synthesis methods (Soilemezi & Linceviciute, 2018; Herber & Barroso, 2019;
Kalpokaite & Radivojevic, 2019). We advise that you start from one of the more accessible methods of synthesis, namely thematic synthesis and framework synthesis. Both methods mirror corresponding established methods used for analysis of primary qualitative data, namely thematic
analysis and framework analysis.

Thematic synthesis
Thematic synthesis seeks to provide a consistent analysis of content across included studies
(Box 8.4). It seeks to identify the diverse factors that help in understanding the focus of interest. It
then seeks to organise these factors into the principal (interpretive) or most common (aggregative)
themes (Table 8.2).

     At a glance – thematic synthesis

        Thematic synthesis involves the systematic coding of data and generating of descriptive and analytical themes. It is an inductive approach. (Nicholson et al., 2016)

=== p. 246 ===

          Reviewer Expertise            

          Information Expertise         

   Table 8.2 SALSA approach mapped to thematic synthesis

   SALSA stage         Procedure (Cruzes & Dybå, 2011b)
   Search              Aims for 'conceptual saturation'. Purposive sampling may involve
                       deliberately seeking negative cases, aiming for maximum variability and
                       designing resulting set of studies to be heterogeneous (Sutton et al., 2019)
   AppraisaL           Procedures for ‘trustworthiness’ seek to examine transparency,
                       generalisability, quality and sensitivity analysis (Thomas & Harden, 2008).
                       Trustworthiness increases when findings are presented in a way that allows
                       the reader to look for alternative interpretations (Cruzes & Dybå, 2011b)
   Synthesis           Extract data
                       Code data
                       Translate codes into themes

   Analysis            Create a model of higher-order themes
                       Assess the trustworthiness of the synthesis

   Note: Cruzes & Dybå (2011b) produced a 21-item checklist for stages of a thematic synthesis.

Framework synthesis
Framework-based synthesis offers an important advance in conducting reviews of qualitative
synthesis. The ‘best fit’ variant is particularly helpful when policy-makers, practitioners or other
decision-makers need answers quickly, and can tolerate ambiguity about whether the answer
is the very best that could be given (Dixon-Woods, 2011). Framework synthesis captures new
understandings as data is incorporated into the framework (Brunton, 2017; Brunton et al., 2020).
You can then express the resulting synthesis – for example, in the form of a model or chart.

   At a glance – framework synthesis

   Framework synthesis:

      originates from framework analysis, a method of analysing primary research data to
      address policy concerns. The research question and the background theoretical and

=== p. 247 ===

      empirical literature shape an understanding of the issue under study into an a priori
      conceptual framework, which develops iteratively as new data are incorporated and
      themes are derived from the data (Brunton et al., 2020). The process of framework
      synthesis is mapped to the SALSA framework in Table 8.3.

   Table 8.3     SALSA approach mapped to framework synthesis

   SALSA stage       Activities (Gale et al., 2013)
   Search            Comprehensive search for primary studies based on predefined criteria.
                     Searches of multiple databases using qualitative methodological filters.
                     May involve iterative searching of theoretical literature, without filters, for
                     both identifying and populating a framework

   AppraisaL         May not only require assessment of the quality of qualitative research
                     but also appraisal of the theory or framework that has been identified for
                     analysis (Booth & Carroll, 2015b)

   Synthesis         Familiarisation: immersion in the included studies with the aims and
                     objectives of the review
                     Identifying or developing a thematic framework
                     Indexing: applying framework to code individual studies

   Analysis          Charting: charts contain distilled summaries of evidence
                     Mapping and interpretation: using the charts to define concepts, map the
                     range and nature of phenomena, create typologies and find associations
                     between themes as a way of developing explanations for the findings

Best fit framework synthesis
‘Best fit’ framework synthesis is a variant of framework synthesis, specifically designed to meet the
needs of systematic reviews. It applies innovative methods to identify theories in a systematic manner
(Booth & Carroll, 2015a), and to create the a priori framework for the qualitative evidence synthesis
(Booth & Carroll, 2015b). Subsequently, it combines existing methods of quality assessment (Carroll
& Booth, 2015), analysis and synthesis (Carroll et al., 2011) to complete the review process.
  Starting with a ‘good enough’ framework, you populate it with as much data as possible
without forcing the data to fit. Following this initial deductive phase, you handle the remaining data inductively, creating new themes until all the data is processed. Best fit framework
synthesis differs from other methods of framework synthesis, which allow the reviewer to add
data inductively at any time in the process, by engineering a blatant gap between the deductive
and inductive phases. This gap ensures a clear audit trail for themes derived from the original

=== p. 248 ===

framework and those subsequently identified by the inductive process of thematic synthesis.
The gap provides added transparency and facilitates project management and version control
by keeping the two stages phased and sequential, rather than iterative.
  Best fit framework synthesis seeks to capitalise on inherent advantages of framework synthesis and thematic synthesis by offering a pragmatic methodology. Where available data is
limited and primarily descriptive (‘thin’ data), the best fit method can still sustain limited
theoretical development. The method relies on ready identification of a conceptual framework
which best fits the data and may occasionally result in a ‘false start’ (e.g. if the framework is
mismatched either by time or space). The method is compatible with current best practice in
searching for and appraising qualitative evidence (Booth, 2016).

   At a glance - best fit framework synthesis

   How is best fit framework synthesis different from framework synthesis?

   Although conventional framework synthesis allows you to keep on modifying the framework
   to codify new themes as they appear in the data, by doing so it sacrifices transparency and
   auditability. Best fit framework synthesis purposely engineers a gap between the data you
   process deductively through an existing framework and data you handle inductively, once you
   have completed coding against that framework. The originators of best fit framework synthesis claim several distinctive features:

   • Pragmatically, it allows a review team to initiate synthesis where no existing conceptual
     model offers a close match to the data being extracted. So, a model of factors that influence women who take dietary supplements offered a good enough fit in the absence of
     a conceptual model for older people taking substances such as aspirin to prevent bowel
     cancer (Carroll et al., 2011).
   • Frameworks are harvested systematically from the literature, via a parallel search process
     (Booth & Carroll, 2015b), rather than requiring detailed input from stakeholders. A match
     of 60–80% between themes from your data and those from a candidate framework indicates sufficient advantage over thematic synthesis.
   • Multiple frameworks can be identified and merged to cover complementary aspects or
     levels of a phenomenon to form a single comprehensive meta-framework (Carroll et al.,
     2013). Logic models (Rehfuess et al., 2018) and policy frameworks offer alternative structures (Booth et al., 2015b) where theoretical frameworks do not exist.
   • The best fit framework synthesis process (Table 8.4) clearly identifies where a new
     expanded model builds upon and extends the original framework.

=== p. 249 ===

    Table 8.4   SALSA approach mapped to the best fit framework synthesis process

    SALSA Stage       Procedure (Booth & Carroll, 2015b)
                      1. Define review question

    Search            2a. Systematically identify relevant primary research studies
                      2b. Identify relevant (best fit) publications of conceptual models/
                          frameworks of theories

    AppraisaL         3. Extract data on study characteristics from included studies and
                         conduct study quality appraisal

    Synthesis         4. Code evidence from included studies from the a priori framework
                         identified in stage 2
                      5. Create new themes by performing secondary thematic analysis on any
                         evidence that cannot be coded into the a priori framework

    Analysis          6. Produce a new framework composed of a priori and new themes
                         supported by the evidence
                      7. Revisit evidence to explore relationships between themes or concepts
                         in order to create a model

PROGRESSING TO ADVANCED FORMS OF SYNTHESIS
Meta-ethnography
Meta-ethnography offers a way of synthesising findings from multiple qualitative studies to
provide ‘a range and depth of meanings, experiences, and perspectives of participants across
health-care contexts’ (Tong et al., 2012). By translating studies into one another, meta-ethnography
seeks to create novel interpretations and ideas about the focus of interest (France et al., 2019b).
If thematic synthesis and framework synthesis are the most accessible methods of qualitative
synthesis then meta-ethnography is the longest established and most frequently cited approach
(Hannes & Macaitis, 2012). However, this does not mean that meta-ethnography is executed
well (France et al., 2014).
    Noblit and Hare (1988) are credited with devising the principles of meta-ethnography.
However, meta-ethnography was not initially presented as a generic method and so further
developments in methodology (Campbell et al., 2011), updating procedures (France et al., 2016)
and reporting (France et al., 2019a) have been required. The original text described three trajectories of synthesis that a meta-ethnography could pursue: reciprocal translation, refuta-tional synthesis and line of argument synthesis (Noblit & Hare, 1988):

•     Reciprocal translation occurs when different accounts are translated into each another.
      Reciprocal translation has been identified as a fundamental strategy present in most types
      of qualitative synthesis (Melendez-Torres et al., 2015).
•     In contrast, refutational synthesis takes place when accounts stand in relative
      opposition to each other and are essentially ‘refutational’, as it allows interpretation
      of conflicting accounts. Attention should be paid to the assumptions, motivations and
      ideology behind a study. A benefit of conducting a refutational translation is that it

=== p. 250 ===

      allows reviewers to identify if theories or ideologies underlying two or more studies differ (France et al., 2019b).
•     Line of argument synthesis offers an overarching interpretation of the studies (Noblit
      & Hare, 1988); even ‘dissimilar but related studies’ taken together represent a ‘line of argument’, thereby revealing a ‘whole’ among a ‘set of parts’.

Meta-ethnography (Box 8.7) persists as one of the most common forms of qualitative synthesis
(France et al., 2019b). First you identify and list key metaphors (themes, perspectives, phrases,
ideas and/or concepts) from each individual study (Noblit & Hare, 1988). You then ‘put together’
these metaphors by linking them across studies. By linking metaphors in this way, you offer a
holistic understanding of complex phenomena (Brookfield et al., 2019).

    At a glance – meta-ethnography

    Meta-ethnography is an interpretive approach that seeks to preserve the social and theoretical contexts in which findings emerge (Noblit & Hare, 1988). Meta-ethnography involves
    systematically comparing conceptual data from primary qualitative studies to identify and
    develop new overarching concepts, theories, and models. The seven ‘phases’ of meta-ethnography
    are mapped to the SALSA framework in Table 8.5

          Information expertise     

          Time                      

          Resources                 £££

    Table 8.5    SALSA approach mapped to meta-ethnography

                       Phase 1: Getting Started (incorporates the rationale, aims and
                       protocol development). Identify ‘an intellectual interest that qualitative
                       research might inform’ (Noblit & Hare, 1988)
    Search             Phase 2 Deciding what is relevant to the initial interest. Identify and
                       select study accounts to synthesise. Noblit & Hare (1988) did not advise
                       how to do this; they selected studies purposefully. Systematic review
                       methods had not yet been developed
    AppraisaL          Phase 3 Reading the studies: ‘repeated reading of the accounts and the
                       noting of interpretative metaphors […] requires extensive attention to the
                       details in the accounts’ (Noblit & Hare, 1988)

=== p. 251 ===

   Synthesis            Phase 4 Determining how the studies are related: ‘the various studies
                        are “put together”’ (Noblit & Hare, 1988). Requires determining ‘the
                        relationships between the studies to be synthesized in order to decide
                        how to synthesize them’ (Noblit & Hare, 1988)
                        Phase 5 Translating the studies into one another: involves
                        systematically comparing the meaning of metaphors, concepts or
                        themes and their relations across study accounts to identify the range of
                        metaphors, concepts, and themes
                        Phase 6 Synthesising translations: Involves ‘going beyond the findings
                        of any individual study’ (Noblit & Hare, 1988). Translations from phase 5
                        are compared to identify common/overarching concepts and to develop
                        new interpretations
   Analysis             Phase 7 Expressing the synthesis: communicating the synthesis to
                        your audience in a suitable format
   Note: Meta-ethnography is typically described as seven phases (Cahill et al., 2018). These phases are best
   considered analytical procedures rather than sequential stages.

  Sampling remains a key issue for meta-ethnography (Atkins et al., 2008; France et al,
2019b). Comprehensive search strategies may be prohibitive given the need to engage intensively with all included studies. An alternative is to construct a preliminary map of studies
and sample purposively to ensure coverage of different populations, settings and experiences of the focus of interest. A third and final approach is to sample according to ‘richness’
of data – continuing to sample from studies of decreasing richness until a point analogous
to theoretical saturation is reached (Ames et al., 2019a). However, typically comprehensive
searches are required either (i) to locate all eligible studies or (ii) to create an optimal
sampling frame.
  Quality assessment was never key to meta-ethnography which privileges quality of interpretation above technical quality (Toye et al., 2013). However, quality assessment is often
expected by funders, editors or peer reviewers. Increasingly, even interpretive methods (e.g.
meta-ethnography) are subject to GRADE-CERQual assessments that require an assessment
of methodological limitations (Munthe-Kaas et al., 2018).
  Outputs from a meta-ethnography may include hypotheses generated from the synthesis and
a model of factors relating to the phenomenon of interest (France et al., 2019b). Outputs can
be presented in a simple, but not overly simplistic, diagrammatic format. To achieve uptake of
findings into policy, programme development and research require multiple strategies, including publication in journals and communication at conferences (see Chapter 10). Harnessing
meta-ethnography findings to an effectiveness review may help in mapping factors to existing
interventions (see Chapter 9).
  Having introduced you to the principal choices for qualitative synthesis we suggest that you
reflect on your own choice of method – both to help you to write your protocol and to identify
your future learning needs.

=== p. 252 ===

   Choosing your method of synthesis
   Examine the different methods of synthesis outlined in this chapter. Sort them into those of
   current potential for your review, those unlikely to prove useful at present, and those where
   you need further detail. Produce a draft learning plan for further reading/research on qualitative data synthesis.

        1a. Best fit framework synthesis
   3. Narrative synthesis (see also Chapter 7)

      Current potential            Further detail required       Not relevant at present

      To find out more on data synthesis I am going to read/research:
      e.g. Meta-aggregation
      By __/__/202_

Toolbox – software for qualitative synthesis
Software may be specific to performing systematic reviews (McInnes & Wimpenny, 2008) or
may be designed for primary qualitative research for use during the synthesis and analysis stages
(Houghton et al., 2017; Haynes et al., 2019). EPPI-Reviewer is intended for use across diverse
review types and allows you to employ a common review approach across quantitative and
qualitative reviews (Park & Thomas, 2018). QARI from the Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI) is specialist software, particularly used for meta-aggregation (McInnes & Wimpenny, 2008), and is one of
a suite of purpose-designed review programmes. Finally, you can use data analysis software, such
as NVivo, to handle coding of texts from journal articles as if they were interview transcripts
(Houghton et al., 2017).
  You can use Google Forms to input data into a framework, specifying question formats using
tick boxes or drop-down menus. You can export the resultant data into a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet or cut and paste the data into Microsoft Word tables. You can use NVivo for framework
synthesis, illustrating that tools and methods of synthesis hold sufficient flexibility to allow
interchangeability in procedures used (Houghton et al., 2017).
  For thematic synthesis, or for the early stages of meta-ethnography, you could import the
complete article into a qualitative data analysis package such as NVivo to allow you to code line

=== p. 253 ===

by line (Toye et al., 2014; Houghton et al., 2017). Uploading a PDF within NVivo allows you to
code conceptual findings wherever they appear within each paper, and to compare individual
team interpretations in one database (Houghton et al., 2017). NVivo offers the facility to record
and compare interpretations, including ‘memoing’ to track developing ideas. Conventional data
extraction assumes an ‘extract once, read multiple times’ way of working. If you are planning to
‘read multiple times, code multiple times’ you may find conventional data extraction a less useful model of working. Constant comparison may prove useful in moving to and fro between
the findings of individual studies and the synthetic findings of studies considered thus far.
  A word of caution: Just because you can cut and paste blocks of text from articles into your
extraction form should not stop you from recognising that not all data is equally relevant.
Effective data extraction revisits the review question to ensure that only data that is relevant, or
potentially relevant, is extracted.

Qualitative data analysis
Analysing what you find
Having performed your initial synthesis you can explore what has been found and what is missing. The synthesis stage aims to tell you what the literature says. The analysis stage focuses on
telling you what the literature means. If synthesis is when a detective assembles and organises all
the clues, then analysis is when that same detective tries to make sense of them.
  Many analytical techniques are available (Table 8.6) during the iterative phases of synthesis
and analysis (Miles et al., 2018). Subsequently, you can present your data using textual, graphical, numerical and tabular techniques (Soilemezi & Linceviciute, 2018).

Table 8.6 Elements of data analysis

Noting patterns and themes        Meta-ethnography, thematic synthesis
Seeing plausibility (ensuring     Meta-ethnography
conclusions make good sense)
Clustering                        Content analysis, framework synthesis, meta-ethnography,
                                  thematic synthesis
Making metaphors                  Meta-ethnography, meta-narrative review
Counting                          Cross-case analysis, meta-analysis (Chapter 7), meta-summary
Making contrasts/comparisons      Meta-ethnography, meta-narrative review
Partitioning variables            Framework synthesis, meta-ethnography, meta-analysis (Chapter 7)
Subsuming particulars into the    Meta-analysis (Chapter 7), meta-ethnography
general
Noting relations between          Logic models, realist synthesis (Chapter 9)
variables
Finding intervening variables     Logic models, realist synthesis (Chapter 9)

=== p. 254 ===

Table 8.6 (Continued)

Building a logical chain of               Logic models, realist synthesis (Chapter 9)
evidence
Making conceptual/theoretical             Concept maps, logic models, meta-ethnography, meta-narrative
coherence                                 review, realist synthesis (Chapter 9)

   Qualitative data has four tools of synthesis at its disposal, namely textual, numerical,
tabular and graphical. Within qualitative synthesis textual approaches occupy the principal place. In addition to narrative synthesis, which can accommodate both paradigms,
textual approaches include techniques from primary qualitative analysis. Table 8.7 illustrates
approaches to synthesis found in different types of review.

Table 8.7 Approaches to synthesis in different types of qualitative evidence synthesis

Approaches to synthesis                Application                                 Review example
Thematic synthesis                     Aimed to understand the concept of          The concept of reflection:
                                       reflection by synthesising conceptual       a systematic review and
Word frequency count
                                       qualitative studies. Used 14 sources to     thematic synthesis across
Thematic synthesis                     construct 4 analytical themes: cognitive,   professional contexts
Synthetic working definition           integrative, iterative and active. Themes   (Marshall, 2019)
(cf. concept analysis)                 were explored in relation to existing
                                       research and a novel definition of
                                       reflection was proposed

Framework synthesis                    Results of data synthesis presented         Factors influencing
                                       by level of the socio-ecologic model        obesogenic behaviours
Thematic presentation
                                       (individual, social, physical and macro     of adolescent girls and
by model categories
                                       levels). Six models deconstructed into      women in low- and
Descriptive statistics on
                                       meta-framework with 72 constructs           middle-income countries:
countries/regions
                                                                                   a qualitative evidence
                                       Sensitivity analyses conducted for
Sensitivity analysis                                                               synthesis (Trübswasser
                                       study quality (high or low), population
                                                                                   et al., 2020)
                                       (adolescent girls or adult women),
                                       continent (Africa, Asia or South
                                       America) and setting (rural or urban)

Meta-ethnography                       Synthesises findings of two ethnographic    Using meta-ethnography
                                       studies and a qualitative review on         to develop a conceptual
                                       the influence of peer-assisted learning     model of peer-assisted
                                       on student nurses. Identified four key      learning of nursing
                                       themes underpinned by six sub-themes        students in clinical practice
                                       and developed a conceptual model of         (Carey et al., 2019)
                                       effective peer-assisted learning

   The human brain finds it easier to identify overall patterns or similarities in data ahead
of being able to spot inconsistencies or exceptions (Booth et al., 2013a). You are likely to be

=== p. 255 ===

subconsciously influenced to impose explanatory patterns over data that is either not present
or non-apparent. The same skills you use in marshalling an argument can equally threaten the
integrity of a study and its results. Furthermore, we are receptive to data that supports our underlying opinion and reject, or explain away, data that is uncomfortable or that does not fit easily.
You should not focus all your attention on constructing a ‘line of argument’. You should pay
similar attention to nuanced findings from inconsistencies or contradictions. A review team (or
student/supervisor) should maximise opportunities to ‘challenge’ persuasive or seductive lines
of argument (Booth et al., 2013a). Those closest to the data, especially newer members of the
team, should feel able to challenge and resist interpretations into which data is inappropriately
‘shoehorned’ (Booth et al., 2013a).
  Few qualitative synthesis methods are operationalised as comprehensive step-by-step processes that offer practical guidance to researchers in producing a rigorous, clear report (Tong
et al., 2012). While you should try to distinguish between different methodologies, it is
equally important to identify generic processes of synthesis and analysis common to multiple
methods.
  Although creativity is an important feature of pattern seeking and interpretation, it is important that, at all times, you ground any theories or hypotheses in your data. Conclusion drawing
and verification is required to move from the ‘particulars into the general’ (Whittemore & Knafl,
2005). As new data is accommodated, you should continually revise any conclusions or conceptual models so that they continue to be inclusive (Miles et al., 2018). You need to verify any patterns, themes, relationships or conclusions with your primary source data to ensure that they are
both accurate and confirmable (Miles et al., 2018). At this stage, you are particularly vulnerable
to a cognitive bias such as being locked into a particular pattern (premature analytic closure)
(Miles et al., 2018) or you may exclude pertinent evidence because it is inconvenient or extraneous to your theorising.
  To use our earlier example about a holiday, you might group individual data into overarching
constructs, such as weather, location, attractions, companions, food and drink, etc. You may
then wish to trace particular responses back to particular respondent characteristics: for example, are males more likely to mention food and drink? Do younger respondents tend to focus
on extreme sports or strenuous activities? You may therefore need to re-examine the data in the
light of such differences. Furthermore, you may identify tensions or conflict between respondents who desire ‘peace and quiet’ and those who require ‘excitement’. Identifying tensions may
lead you to explore how individuals manage these in practice, perhaps through alternation or
having separate holidays to supplement a family holiday.
  Data extraction against themes helps to identify patterns (Kalpokaite & Radivojevic, 2019).
Within the limited number (three studies) of reports included in the thematic matrix (Table 8.8)
for a hypothetical review on the attitudes of village communities to peripherally located supermarkets we observe:
  Study 1 by Greenwood and Liffey focuses exclusively on economic considerations. Studies 2
and 3 both look at convenience with regard to road traffic. Study 3 by Swathe is overwhelmingly
positive whereas Studies 1 and 2 cover positives and negatives. Studies 2 and 3 carry implications for (different) health-related services.
  Therefore, a matrix is useful for pattern recognition (Harden et al., 2018). Themes may
derive from the data (as with grounded theory, thematic synthesis or meta-ethnography
approaches) or from a published framework or model (as for framework synthesis).

=== p. 256 ===

Table 8.8 Hypothetical thematic matrix for review on attitudes to peripheral
supermarkets

                                                         Article content
                         Greenwood & Liffey (2010)       Verdant (2010)             Swathe (2011)
Theme                    (Study 1)                       (Study 2)                  (Study 3)
Convenience                                              Good communications        On outskirts of
                                                         via main roads             village therefore
                                                                                    reduces congestion
                                                         Ample parking

Household economy        Reduces price of staple         Reduced petrol prices      Cheap petrol
                         products (e.g. bread, milk)

Focus for community                                      Location for charitable    Venue for blood
                                                         collections                transfusion service
                                                         Health education stands

Threat to local          Challenges bespoke traders      24-hour competition to
commerce                 (e.g. bakers, dairies)          petrol stations

Threat to community      Uniform character of            Reduced use of village
identity                 hypermarkets – cheap            centre
                         builds                          Increased use by
                                                         non-locals

Testing or confirming review findings
Essentially analysis provides you with an opportunity to assess the strength of evidence for
drawing conclusions about the results of synthesis and their generalisability in your intended
context. Several techniques help you to do this (Table 8.9). These ‘tactics’ derive from primary
research but apply equally within synthesis.

Table 8.9       Tactics for testing or confirming review findings

Representativeness      Requires that you explore whether the various study populations match the
                        characteristics of the target population. Examine your component studies.
                        Ask yourself, ‘Are any particular groups underrepresented? Are any groups
                        overrepresented? Am I confident that the characteristics of a particular group
                        are not misrepresented or misinterpreted?’
Researcher effects      Cultivate a healthy scepticism when exploring likely researcher effects. Do the
                        researchers favour a particular programme or intervention – for example, did
                        they influence the selection of outcomes? Have they triggered inadvertent
                        researcher effects, e.g. if a qualitative researcher is a doctor did this change
                        how participants communicate or what they chose to share with them?
Triangulating           Use different methods to research the same issue. How do review findings
                        compare across different study designs, different schools of thought, or
                        different methods of data collection (Finfgeld-Connett, 2018a)? How do
                        findings from secondary research compare when juxtaposed and discussed
                        against those from your subsequent primary research?

=== p. 257 ===

Weighting the             Asks you to ensure that your conclusions are not simply based on ‘vote
evidence                  counting’. Not all studies are equal! Look at the effect of ordering studies from
                          the highest quality to the lowest quality. Ask yourself ‘Are positive or negative
                          aspects clustered around particular points in this ranking?’
Meaning of outliers       Take precautions against over-generalisation. Examine studies that show
                          particularly extreme results (either very positive or very negative) or those that
                          are a unique source of a particular theme. Discuss these findings with colleagues
                          and topical experts. Ask them, ‘Can you identify possible explanations for the
                          difference in the findings?’. Explore colleagues’ explanations in your analysis or
                          suggest them as hypotheses to explore in future research
Using extreme             Whereas outliers relate to extreme results, extreme cases represent atypical
cases                     contexts. Examine the characteristics of populations and interventions for an
                          insight into better than expected or worse than expected (but not necessarily
                          outlying) results
Following up              Following up surprises involves identifying where one or more studies do not
surprises                 fit within their anticipated place within a pattern. Do more than simply look
                          for outliers; a ‘surprise’ may lie embedded within the ‘pack’ of studies but not
                          where predicted. Record surprises as you encounter them because, over an
                          extended period of time, they may lose their capacity to surprise. Having
                          validated surprises, highlight them in publications, oral presentations and
                          press releases, and invite explanations
Looking for               Frequently overlooked because synthesis gravitates towards commonality
negative evidence         rather than dissonance. Actively seek disconfirmation of what you believe to
                          be true. Sample purposively from outside the original sampling frame, bring
                          together different perspectives within the research team or harness other
                          procedures to challenge the ‘orthodoxy’ (Booth et al., 2013a)
Make if–then tests        Testing possible relationships: For example, ‘if a study mentions that …, then
                          the view expressed of… should resemble…’. If one condition is the case, look to
                          see if a second one is. If it is, you are on the way towards understanding what
                          is going on and can make further similar tests. If it is not true, then you need
                          to make other conjectures
Rule out spurious         To follow up if–then testing you need to rule out spurious relations. Ideally,
relations                 your studies would include those reporting the presence of the two conditions:
                          the absence of each and the presence/absence of a third variable. Consider
                          whether a third factor or variable may possibly explain away the apparent
                          relationship identified from the data
Replicate a finding       You may need to refer to external data sources, e.g. in order to replicate
                          a finding. Perhaps, extend your sampling frame to an adjacent area of
                          literature where the underlying explanatory mechanism is likely to be present.
                          Alternatively, split your set of studies and use half of the studies to generate
                          the theory or hypothesis and the other half to test and validate it
Check out rival           Keep your mind open to alternative explanations and check out rival
explanations              explanations. Record any theory underpinning each study as you extract the
                          data from each. Revisit these theories when you complete your synthesis.
                          Look for explanations in the Introductions/Discussions of the studies or
                          accompanying editorial or commentary material
Feedback from             Using informants to validate findings remains controversial, because the synthesis
informants                may not be recognisable to authors of a single study. This is not an argument
                          against respondent validation per se but simply for how to handle and weight
                          feedback against the synthesis. Gain early and clear agreement on stakeholder
                          roles. Clearly explain how you plan to use any feedback alongside your synthesis

=== p. 258 ===

    A truth table, a matrix codifying the presence or absence of particular factors in individual
studies, may be a useful practical tool for identifying such relationships (Cruzes & Dybå, 2011a).
This is similar to the thematic matrix demonstrated earlier but with binary indicators of presence or
absence (e.g. 1 versus 0 or check box versus empty cell) rather than qualitative themes (Table 8.10).

Table 8.10 Hypothetical truth table for review on attitudes to peripheral supermarkets

                                           Explanatory variables                  Dependent variable
                                                                                  Orchestrated
Study                                      A       B       C       D       E      community opposition
Greenwood & Liffey (2010) (Study 1)        0       1       0       1       1      1
Verdant (2010) (Study 2)                   1       1       1       1       1      0
Swathe (2011) (Study 3)                    1       1       1       0       0      0
Total                                      2       3       2       2       2      1
Note: A = Convenience; B = Household economy; C = Focus for community; D = Threat to local commerce; E = Threat
to community identity.

    Note that findings from this hypothetical truth table appear to show that orchestrated community opposition is less likely to be present if a supermarket emphasises its role as a focus for
community activities. However, the contribution from the fictional Greenwood and Liffey study
shows that opposition occurs even where this factor is present.

Where to next? Advanced forms of analysis
Up to now we have focused on primarily descriptive procedures of analysis. However, your analytical toolkit also obtains more advanced forms of analysis. We will briefly explore the potential
to use the following:

•     Identifying gaps
•     Reviewer effects
•     Identifying the disconfirming case
•     Subgroup analysis
•     Sensitivity analysis.

Qualitative reviewers seek reassurance that their literature sample is adequate: whether they have
identified all studies (comprehensive sampling), whether they have enough studies (purposive
sampling) or whether they have identified the right studies (theoretical sampling) (Suri, 2011).
    For an interpretative review you should evaluate, with a colleague, supervisor or mentor, whether you have reached theoretical saturation (Booth, 2016). In theory, theoretical
saturation should be less frequent than in primary research as, unlike interviewees, authors are
not independent informants (Dixon-Woods et al., 2006a). Indeed, authors are incentivised to
report innovative insights. To challenge theoretical saturation you should make strenuous

=== p. 259 ===

attempts to sample from other disciplines relevant to the review question or from other types of
literature. Whereas aggregative reviews implicitly value the average result, interpretative
reviews seek to identify the disconfirming case (Booth et al., 2013a).
  As with primary qualitative research the often talked-about ‘sweet spot’ of theoretical saturation is difficult to identify. It is challenging to identify when theoretical saturation has been
reached and studies are not adding new insights (Blandford et al., 2016). Some propose that,
as an alternative, bibliographical saturation may be attainable when follow-up of cross-references no longer leads to included studies not previously identified (Revelli & Viviani, 2013).
However, this requires further empirical testing.

Reviewer effects and reflexivity
Even systematic reviews, despite their precautions, cannot be considered neutral vehicles for
research findings. A review reflects the ‘perspectives, preferences and propensities’ (Sandelowski,
2008) of its reviewers. Reviewer preferences operate at every stage from conception of the
review and selection of the principal research question through to study identification, selection and assessment. Preferences can be further identified within synthesis and analysis. The
Cochrane EPOC Group highlights a need for reflexivity within its review template (https://
epoc.cochrane.org/sites/epoc.cochrane.org/files/public/uploads/Resources-for-authors2017/
epoc_qes_protocol_and_review_template.docx ), prospectively within the Protocol/Methods,
upon commencement of a review project, and then retrospectively within the Analysis write-up
(see Chapter 10). Analysis is the right time to consider, within the Discussion, likely researcher
effects, not only in the component studies but also in the review itself.
  Systematic reviews claim objectivity but, in reality, only aspire to ‘disciplined subjectivity’
(Sandelowski, 2008). As an honest reviewer your analysis should acknowledge likely challenges
to objectivity posed by your own preoccupations and prejudices. You should recognise that your
systematic review is ‘situated, partial and perspectival’ (Badenhorst, 2018) and communicate
these limitations to your reader.

Publication bias
Publication rates of qualitative conference presentations, with less than half being eventually
published, are directly comparable with quantitative research (Petticrew et al., 2008). However,
qualitative research is more likely to be subsequently published if the study methods and findings are reported well in the abstract. More detailed investigation of patterns and causes of the
non-dissemination of qualitative research are needed (Toews et al., 2016; 2017).
  You should therefore explore likely publication bias with regard to qualitative studies or theoretical/conceptual studies (Booth et al., 2018a). For qualitative studies you might use a matrix
to examine whether any populations, age groups or countries where the focus of interest is
common are comparatively under-represented. For theoretical/conceptual studies you might
brainstorm, either singly or with colleagues or a mentor, those disciplines that are likely to have
studied the focus of interest. Compare your list with the characteristics of your included studies.
Are any disciplines comparatively under-represented? Bear in mind that publication bias may
apply within articles as well as across a set of articles. ‘Truncation bias’ (Campbell et al., 2011)

=== p. 260 ===

was coined to refer to the tendency for journals to truncate full reporting for qualitative studies
due to article word limits.
  While methods for detecting and reporting the effects of publication bias are most developed
for quantitative studies (see Chapter 7), similar questions may be asked with regard to reporting
bias in qualitative studies (Toews et al., 2016; 2017; Booth et al., 2018a). You can use a framework approach for examining qualitative studies to check whether themes, concerns or issues
are missing or under-represented. You might consider whether any specific themes or concerns
have not been reported because of stigma, peer pressure, the influence of the researcher, limitations of the methodology or concerns about confidentiality or possible reprisals. If you are
conducting a review of barriers and facilitators you can examine whether (i) positive and negative expressions of the same barrier are equally present in the literature (e.g. time pressures and
lack of time), and (ii) whether barriers may be paired with corresponding facilitators. Of course,
you should examine reasons for such gaps, whether a feature of the data collection process, of
incomplete reporting or whether genuinely unrecognised. However, do not make the mistake of
thinking that the frequency with which a particular theme is reported relates to its importance:

      sampling research papers is fundamentally not like sampling people. Unlike people, research
      papers have a vested interest in being different from one another, and are (in theory at least)
      only published if they are saying something new. Missing out some papers may therefore risk
      missing out potentially important insights. (Dixon-Woods et al., 2006a)

For theoretical/conceptual studies you may wish to examine citation patterns. If authors neglect
to cite a particular author or school of thought within the same field ask yourself, ‘Why has this
happened? Are other authors ignorant of particular arguments, do conflicts or tensions exist, or
is this intentional?’. Look at how citations have cross-fertilised, or alternatively remain in ‘silos’
across disciplines. Use such observations to inform your own analysis.

Identifying the disconfirming case
Systematic approaches to the literature typically test the robustness of the emerging review product:

      Analytical honesty is a priority; the data analysis process is made transparent with rival explanations and spurious relationships thoughtfully explored. (Whittemore & Knafl, 2005)

While such an approach may seem daunting, particularly to the novice researcher, it is essential
if the review is to establish itself as a reliable and authoritative contribution to the evidence base.
Identification of the negative or disconfirming case is commonly regarded as the most difficult
component of the synthesis process (Whittemore & Knapfl, 2005). It is particularly challenging
when conflicting results are equally compelling and derive from high-quality reports. Such differences may typically occur across one or more specific variables. You should try not to attach
too much importance to a single preferred variable when a difference may be attributable to
the interaction of many variables. Is it possible that multiple interventions do not work together
more effectively but rather that an individual intervention works alone with its specific effect
being masked by the other interventions?
  You can encourage diverse interpretations by valuing specific roles within the team, engineering different researcher viewpoints and through triangulation (Booth et al., 2013a).

=== p. 261 ===

Triangulation, a navigational metaphor, includes using multiple data sources (e.g. members of
the public, those delivering a service or programme and other stakeholders), multiple data collection methods (e.g. use of in-depth interviews and focus groups), multiple disciplinary perspectives (e.g. education, management science and psychology) and comparison with existing
theory (Korstjens & Moser, 2018). Of course, individual studies may differ from the overall set of
studies as genuine ‘outliers’. In such cases, reconsider whether it makes sense to include outliers
within an overarching analysis or whether you should analyse them separately.
  Because you could be led towards a wrong conclusion you must document all your hunches
and other intuitive steps in the process. You can then retrace your steps and construct an alternative argument. Test any premises for your thinking with a supervisor or mentor and check
assumptions with stakeholders or user representatives. Do not automatically assume that your
line of reasoning is wrong just because your perceptions are not confirmed by other parties.
After all, your synthesised insights extend beyond those of an individual researcher immersed
in a single context. However, if conflicting evidence or viewpoints persist, you could suggest
specific research that is needed to resolve the issue.

Subgroup analysis
Analysing a qualitative body of research involves moving iteratively between the whole and
the component studies. Different groups or ‘clusters’ of studies share population, intervention,
methodological or contextual characteristics. Are these characteristics shared by the total review
population or is an individual study the exception to the rule? For example, in a review of
e-learning among health professionals, where studies of doctors are in the majority, does the
overall interpretation transfer to the subgroup of nurses represented by a smaller proportion of
studies or even to another group represented by a single study?

Qualitative sensitivity analysis
As defined in Chapter 7 sensitivity analysis is the formal ‘exploration of “what ifs”’
(Greenhalgh, 2019). Sensitivity analysis is increasingly important in qualitative synthesis.
Typical indications for performing sensitivity analysis in a qualitative evidence synthesis are
given in Box 8.8. What is less clear, however, is what to do once such sensitivities are identified.

   Reasons for considering a qualitative sensitivity analysis
   Consider conducting a qualitative sensitivity analysis where:

   1. You have had persistent doubts about whether a study is eligible for inclusion within a
      review; if you exclude this study would one or more themes from your synthesis become
      unsupported?

=== p. 262 ===

   2. You have identified significant differences in the quality of included studies; are particular
      themes only present in poorer quality studies or are they distributed across both good-and poor-quality studies?
   3. You are uncertain whether differences between included studies are more important than
      any similarities. How important are such similarities or differences likely to be in explaining
      the overall focus of interest?
   4. You observe that one study has results very different from the rest of the studies (i.e. it is
      an obvious outlier); qualitatively does that study have important differences from all other
      studies or does it simply reflect a similar number and type of differences as are present
      collectively in other studies?
   5. You have assumed that similarly worded themes mean the same thing; how open is your
      assumption to an alternative interpretation or nuance – i.e. that they are, in fact, substantively different?
   6. You consider the overall framework or itemisation of themes to be particularly influenced
      by one individual study (e.g. the most content rich, the earliest, etc.); could you still find
      evidence of all the themes were you to exclude this study? (Bear in mind too that later
      authors may have a vested interest in emphasising additional or alternative themes – do
      they acknowledge the conceptual legacy of the earlier paper in their citations or have they
      not identified such themes in their data?)

Matching the analysis to the review purpose
Approaches to qualitative synthesis range from those that aim to identify and describe major
themes to those that seek more generalisable, interpretive explanations for use in theory generating (Finfgeld-Connett, 2013). In fact, many syntheses use both approaches or include findings
that are neither descriptive nor interpretive. Below, we explore how diverse qualitative reviews
match their analytical techniques to their purpose (Table 8.11).

Table 8.11    Examining methods of analysis used in qualitative reviews

review          analysis used             Application of methods                Review example
Framework       Qualitative sensitivity   Majority of studies rated as high     Healthcare staffs’
synthesis       analysis                  quality. Reports of lower quality     experiences and
                                          included in synthesis. Sensitivity    perceptions of caring
                                          analysis, using matrix queries        for people with
                Recommendations           within NVivo, confirmed findings      dementia in the acute
                for practice, policy      from lower quality studies did        setting (Houghton
                and future research       not influence overall findings        et al., 2016)
                                          (weighting/contribution)
Meta-           Used modified             Chose meta-ethnographic               A systematic literature
ethnography     meta-ethnographic         approach because its inductive        review of the ethics of
                approach to               process can account for differences   conducting research
                inductively identify      in methodology and focus.             in the humanitarian
                key concepts and          Potential for higher level analysis   setting (Bruno & Haar,
                synthesise themes         and to generate new research          2020)

=== p. 263 ===

review          analysis used            Application of methods              Review example

                Process of extracting    questions. Three step analysis:
                themes using             (1) Identifying original concepts
                reciprocal translation   and ideas from each paper;
                and constant             (2) synthesising ideas into
                comparison across        cross-cutting themes; and (3)
                studies                  identifying major themes. Process
                                         elucidated tensions and areas for
                                         future research

Thematic        Results and              Use ‘thematic coding’ (within       Healthier land,
synthesis       discussion sections      approach called ‘qualitative        healthier farmers:
                (or equivalents)         meta-synthesis’) to analyse role    considering the
                coded as qualitative     of Australia’s natural resource     potential of natural
                text. Findings           management programs in              resource management
                translated into          farmers’ well-being                 as a place-focused
                common set of                                                farmer health
                qualitative codes.                                           intervention (Schirmer
                Then codes from                                              et al., 2013)
                first round reviewed
                and reorganised into
                hierarchical, thematic
                groups

WRITING UP AND PRESENTING REVIEW FINDINGS
Your key objective in writing up the findings of your review is to ensure that your synthesis is
clearly and accurately reported (Finfgeld-Connett, 2018c). You can display extracted or coded
qualitative data as tables, matrices, graphs, charts or networks (Whittemore & Knafl, 2005). Such
displays help to visualise patterns and relationships within and across the constituent studies
and offer a starting point for interpretation and analysis. Visualisation using a framework lends
itself to critical reflection by a research team and diverse stakeholders, beyond insights from a
single analyst (Brunton et al., 2020).

Using tables to present your data
You can use tables to describe characteristics of the population, intervention and top-level
themes (Box 8.9). You can also use tabulation to describe study characteristics (e.g. study design).
You may use tabulation to report the study quality of individual studies, making it easier to identify higher quality studies. Tabulation is particularly valuable for cross-case comparison and for
‘eyeballing’ patterns across rows or down columns. However, tabulation is necessarily reductive
and loses details of implementation context. Selectively including data in tables can result in
loss of detail that helps in interpreting included studies. More details of tabulation, together
with examples, are given in Chapter 7.

=== p. 264 ===

   Tell tale tables!
   Tables of included studies are easy to compile, right? Wrong!
      When reviewing a review assignment or manuscript we look for signs of carelessness:

   1. Has the author only presented the included studies in the order that they came to hand?
   2. Could the author have chosen a natural order for listed studies to support the accompanying narrative? For example, chronological order to show how the evidence base evolves
      over time? Reverse chronological order to emphasise current findings? Geographical region to group comparable studies?
   3. If there is no obvious alternative order, are listed studies organised by author surname and
      then by date of publication? This allows the reader to locate familiar studies quickly.
   4. Does it make sense to present listed studies in a single sequence or do they fall into natural
      subgroups or categories? For example, high-income countries and low- and middle-income
      countries; primary care and secondary care; children, adults and older people; and so on.
      Are they then sorted into a natural order within each of these categories?
   5. Has the author simply cut and pasted raw data from the original articles into the review
      tables without editing? Careful editing seeks (i) to strip out unnecessary text (e.g. ‘This
      study was conducted in’); (ii) to standardise the format and detail across studies; and (iii)
      to avoid splitting tables and cells across pages.
   6. Has the author standardised inconsistent data under common labels, where appropriate,
      to help to identify patterns across columns? For example, categorising ‘Survey design’,
      ‘Survey questionnaire’ and ‘Survey’ under a single common label of ‘Survey’. Note that this
      is not always appropriate where labels carry meaningful distinctions or where labels used
      by authors are the focus of study (e.g. ‘Third World’, ‘Developing Countries’ and ‘Low-and
      Middle-Income Countries’).

Using numbers to present your data
Although qualitative systematic reviews focus on textual and narrative methods of presentation,
qualitative synthesis is both descriptive and analytical. For descriptive purposes numerical counting may be important – for example, how many studies come from each country, how many
studies include perspectives from patients, carers and health professionals respectively, etc. You
can also use numerical data to characterise the included population, for example to determine
the average age of the population or the percentage who smoke. You can refer to contextual
details to explain why qualitative themes/factors are present in some studies but not in others.

Using graphics to present your data
Before exploring the use of graphics in expressing your synthesis we suggest that you undertake
Exercise 8.3.

=== p. 265 ===

   Helpful display of themes and concepts
   Briefly reflect on a research study from a journal article that you have recently read, not
   necessarily a systematic review. How does the presentation of themes and concepts help you
   when reading the study? Does anything make the themes or concepts difficult to understand
   and interpret? If so, what? How would you improve the presentation?
      Graphical approaches help with the identification of patterns. They help to visualise how
   parts fit within an overall whole. You can use graphical approaches to cross-link disparate
   features of a review (e.g. for linking study characteristics to findings). For example, you could
   use colour coding to indicate whether qualitative findings from a review are associated with
   negative (red), neutral (yellow) or positive (green) results.

      Creativity and critical analysis of data and data displays are key elements in data
      comparison and the identification of important and accurate patterns and themes.
      (Whittemore & Knafl, 2005)

   You should use graphs, charts, forms and figures to help you visualise, sort and compare the
   data across your primary sources (Whittemore & Knafl, 2005). You can use graphical methods to
   explore, as well as present, your data. You can use mind maps, concept maps and idea webs to
   map out the main themes or variables in a creative and imaginative way (Exercise 8.1). Graphical
   presentation can use lines and boxes to present how studies are linked together with thick lines
   indicating multiple studies and thin lines depicting a single study. Continuous lines may indicate
   a confirmed link with dotted lines for hypothesised links. Shading can be used to depict studies
   that contribute to a particular theme. Use of graphics is further considered in Chapter 10. You
   will find it helpful to think of graphical presentation as (i) methods of presentation that you use
   to explore patterns as you conduct a review (i.e. formative presentation) and (ii) methods of
   presentation that you can use when presenting findings to a target audience (i.e. summative
   presentation). Some methods are best for exploring and others for explaining – and some suitable for both. For example, one Cochrane review used a complex logic model while the review
   team was exploring potential connections during its review and a simplified published version to
   explain the principal connections to readers of the finalised review (Turley et al., 2013).

Revisiting the review question(s)
You should return to your review protocol and question throughout your review (Butler
et al., 2016), for example when checking items against the scope or for planning your synthesis
strategy. It is particularly important to do this at the analysis stage. By now you have been so
intensively and extensively engaged with the literature that your review could drift from being
question driven to literature driven. You need to check that the questions you are answering are
those identified in the original review protocol. You also need to establish that the included studies map to each question or whether you need to conduct additional searches to populate any
gaps. For a mapping review, you can identify where gaps exist, provided you are confident that

=== p. 266 ===

you have looked in the right places. For a policy review, you may have to settle for lower quality
study designs, drilling down to lower forms of evidence such as case series, case study or even
expert opinion. Such decisions will impact on how you describe your methods, discuss uncertainties surrounding the evidence base and make recommendations for action and for future
research. You could map the literature against a logic model to identify which questions are
well covered and which are data poor. Finally, revisiting your review question may suggest further lines of enquiry that your analysis might take. For example, a reference in your objectives to
‘evaluating the quantity and quality of the retrieved literature’ may prompt you to use tables and
mapping to reflect the quantity of the literature and sensitivity analysis to investigate its quality.

Discussing the limitations of the evidence
Placing review findings in context requires that you identify the limitations of the evidence.
One systematic way of doing this is to use the GRADE-CERQual approach. This approach is
applied to individual review findings from a qualitative evidence synthesis (Lewin et al., 2015).
Critical to the application of GRADE-CERQual is an understanding that a review finding is:

      an analytic output from a qualitative evidence synthesis that, based on data from primary
      studies, describes a phenomenon or an aspect of a phenomenon. (Lewin et al., 2018b)

GRADE-CERQual aims to describe how much confidence decision-makers and other users can
place in individual review findings from syntheses of qualitative evidence. Confidence in the
evidence requires that you assess the extent to which the review finding is a reasonable representation of the phenomenon of interest against four separate components (Table 8.12).
This assessment communicates whether a research finding differs substantively (i.e. enough to
change a policy or practice decision) from the focus of interest.

Table 8.12 Components of the GRADE-CERQual approach

Component              Definition
Methodological         The extent to which there are problems in the design or conduct of the
limitations            primary studies that contributed evidence to a review finding
Relevance              The extent to which the body of evidence from the primary studies supporting
                       a review finding is applicable to the context (perspective or population,
                       phenomenon of interest, setting) specified in the review question
Coherence              The extent to which the pattern that constitutes a review finding is based
                       on data that is similar across multiple individual studies and/or incorporates
                       convincing explanations for any variations across individual studies
Adequacy of data       An overall determination of the degree of richness and/or scope of the data as
                       well as the quantity of data supporting a review finding

  Each GRADE-CERQual component (Table 8.12) is assessed individually, often requiring iteration between components such as coherence and adequacy (Lewin et al., 2018b), before a final
overall assessment of confidence in the review finding is produced (Table 8.13).

=== p. 267 ===

Table 8.13 The GRADE-CERQual approach – definitions of levels of confidence in a
review finding

Level                            Definition
High confidence                  It is highly likely that the review finding is a reasonable
                                 representation of the phenomenon of interest
Moderate confidence              It is likely that the review finding is a reasonable representation
                                 of the phenomenon of interest
Low confidence                   It is possible that the review finding is a reasonable
                                 representation of the phenomenon of interest
Very low confidence              It is not clear whether the review finding is a reasonable
                                 representation of the phenomenon of interest

  Finally a summary of qualitative findings table is produced, depicting the finding, the assessment for the finding, a brief explanation and identification of the contributing studies (Lewin
et al., 2018a).

                      rapid review tip 17

   Grading the certainty of qualitative evidence
   Use a single reviewer to grade the certainty of evidence. Use a second reviewer to verify all
   judgements (and to check the footnoted rationales of the first reviewer).

                                                                                Garritty et al. (2021)

To discuss the limitations of your review well you do not simply list systematic errors and associated problems with validity. That is like a plumber who meets any problems, regardless of
severity, with a sharp intake of breath! Instead, you should explain the meaning of any errors
and their likely influence. Your audience will gain a clear picture of how methodological limitations impact on the findings of the review (Munthe-Kaas et al., 2018).
  Just as you take steps to avoid biases when you plan, conduct, analyse and interpret individual primary studies, you must take similar steps when you plan, conduct, analyse and interpret
evidence syntheses. When you evaluate your review, or the published review of another, you
need to identify any methodological limitations (Tong et al., 2016; SBU, 2019) (Box 8.10).

   Identifying methodological limitations in your review
   1. Have I clearly stated the question examined in my review?
   2. Does the review team include an appropriate mix of skills and perspectives?

=== p. 268 ===

   Search

      3. Are my search approaches appropriate to my research question?
      4. Does my search strategy include the diverse terms required to identify the relevant studies?
      5. Are the inclusion/exclusion criteria for my review clearly described?
      6. Was study selection undertaken in an objective and independent way, including appropriate quality assurance procedures?

   Appraisal

      7. Did I assess any risks to rigour of included studies using explicit criteria, including appropriate quality assurance procedures?

   Synthesis

    8. Was the chosen method of synthesis appropriate to the research question, audience and
       purpose?
    9. Were procedures for the chosen method of synthesis followed appropriately?
   10. Is the relationship between the output from the synthesis and the original included studies
       clear and transparent?

   Analysis

   11. Are the conclusions and recommendations from the review report supported by the synthesis?

   (Based on Booth et al., 2013a; 2016; Lewin et al., 2018b; Tong et al., 2016; SBU, 2019)

Rapid QES (rQES)
Abbreviated timelines often do not allow for the full 6–12 months it may take to complete
a QES, which has prompted several agencies to explore the concept of ‘rapid qualitative
evidence synthesis’ (rQES) (Majid & Weeks, 2020) (Box 8.11). As with rapid reviews more
generically, this involves using abbreviated methods (shortcuts) and/or accelerating standard procedures through using large, well-coordinated teams and/or technology (Campbell
F et al., 2019).

   What is a rapid qualitative evidence synthesis (rQES)?
   An rQES uses accelerated or abbreviated review methods of qualitative synthesis to meet
   a policy imperative for person-centred healthcare and to ensure that patient and caregiver
   perspectives and experiences are central to healthcare decisions (Majid & Weeks, 2020).
   Shortcuts or fast-track procedures may take place at any stage of the SALSA process
   including limiting the number of databases, abbreviating or omitting quality appraisal,

=== p. 269 ===

   using existing frameworks for synthesis and focusing on descriptive rather than analytical
   findings. A cross-sectional audit of rQES found few published, and a larger number of
   unpublished, examples (Campbell F et al., 2019). In 2020 the first ever Cochrane rQES
   was completed within a period of less than 30 days (Houghton et al., 2020). The authors
   shared lessons learned (Biesty et al., 2020). Published guidance exists to inform rQES
   methods (NHS Scotland, 2019).

         Information expertise    
         Time     		              
         Resources  	             ££

Mega-ethnography and mega-aggregation (review of reviews)
The proliferation of qualitative evidence syntheses (QESs) had led to the appearance of reviews of
QESs that seek to synthesise review-level findings. While there is no reason to suppose that such
overviews can only harness a limited range of synthesis methods, the first of these methods have
been labelled mega-ethnography (after meta-ethnography) (Toye et al., 2017; 2019) and mega-aggregation (which combines meta-aggregation with framework synthesis) (Hendricks et al., 2021).
While such approaches remain in their infancy and examples are limited, Box 8.12 briefly defines
each method. Table 8.14 summarises and juxtaposes the main procedures within the two methods.

   What are mega-ethnography and mega-aggregation?

      Mega-ethnography is a proposed method for synthesising multiple QESs using the methods of meta-ethnography. The innovation of mega-ethnography is to use conceptual
      findings from qualitative evidence syntheses as primary data. The process largely follows
      that for meta-ethnography but seeks qualitative syntheses rather than primary qualitative
      studies and adds an additional layer of interpretation (labelled fourth-level constructs)
      (Toye et al., 2017).

      Mega-aggregation uses ‘mega-aggregation framework synthesis, or synthesis of qualitative evidence syntheses using the methods of framework synthesis at the overview
      level’. Originators claim the novel method is a ‘transparent and efficient method for
      assessing the quality and making sense of existing qualitative systematic reviews’
      (Hendricks et al., 2021).

=== p. 270 ===

Table 8.14    Comparison of mega-aggregation and mega-ethnography

Mega-aggregation (Hendricks et al., 2021)            Mega-ethnography (Toye et al., 2017)
(1) Identify a clearly defined review question and   Stage 1: Getting started
objectives
(2) Identify a theoretical framework or model
(3) Decide on criteria for considering reviews for   Stage 2: Deciding what is relevant
inclusion
(4) Conduct searching and screening
                                                     Stage 3: Reading the studies
(5) Conduct quality appraisal of the included
(6) Data extraction and categorisation               Stage 4: Determining how studies are related to
                                                     each other
                                                     Stage 5: Translating studies into each other
(7) Present and synthesise the findings              Stage 6: Synthesising translations
(8) Transparent reporting                            Stage 7: Expressing the synthesis
At a glance                                          At a glance
Reviewer expertise                                 Reviewer expertise         
Information expertise                               Information expertise      
Time                                               Time                       
Resources                ££                          Resources                  ££

SUMMARY
This chapter illustrates that synthesis includes creative elements of seeking patterns, examining
for consistency and identifying the disconfirming case. As a reviewer you will find it stimulating
to explore reasons for variations, discrepancies and inconsistencies. This exploration, together
with testing of the robustness of findings, constitutes analysis, a high-order research skill.
Analysis is often presented as a naturally occurring sequel lacking formal procedures. Analysis
involves identifying patterns to data and included studies, investigating conflicting or outlying
cases and exploring relationships between particular variables.
  Concerns about applicability, generalisability, replicability and implementation fidelity shape
recommendations for research and for practice. Once such recommendations are drafted and
exist in a fluid or malleable state, you can turn your attention to how best to present the report,
the focus for Chapter 10.

                        key learning points

   • Numerous approaches to synthesis exist and you should explore published methods and
     examples before selecting a methodology that is fit for purpose.
   • Data extraction is a key step towards synthesis; you will find it helpful to picture what your
     final synthesis might look like before selecting data to be extracted.

=== p. 271 ===

• Analysis initially involves testing the robustness of your synthesis in the light of what you
  know about the quality of included studies.
• You can select from diverse types of data presentation including textual, graphical, numerical and tabular approaches.

                  frequently asked questions (FAQs)

FAQ 8.1 How do I choose an appropriate method for qualitative synthesis?
Several publications itemise the rich choice of QES methods. However, relatively few offer
guidance on how to match your review to the method of synthesis (Booth et al., 2016; 2018b).
Look back to Chapter 3 and attempt the scenarios given. Use the RETREAT framework
(Chapter 3) to specify key features such as Research question, Audience & purpose, and
Type of data for your review. Consult sources that focus on selecting an appropriate method:
Hannes and Lockwood (2011a) and Booth et al. (2018b). Gough et al. (2017) offer an overview
of available choices and their theoretical underpinnings.

FAQ 8.2 Which methods of qualitative evidence synthesis are most suitable for
a novice reviewer?
Review expertise is not the only issue to consider. You need to be familiar with qualitative
research when reviewing qualitative literature. However, the most accessible methods of
synthesis include meta-aggregation, thematic synthesis or framework synthesis. Meta-aggregation minimises the interpretive burden as the reviewer compiles themes articulated by the authors of the primary studies, supporting these with verbatim extracts from
the texts. Thematic synthesis is considered intuitive to the novice reviewer (Soilemezi
& Linceviciute, 2018). However, if your topic is well theorised and you are not confident
in generating new themes then you might consider framework synthesis. Having gained
confidence from mapping most of the data to an existing framework you may feel able to
create new themes for data not previously accommodated within the framework.

FAQ 8.3 Once I have identified all my included papers where should I start?
You might start with a holistic approach that involves reading through the body of literature, with very little hesitation or interruption, perhaps occasionally memoing or annotating with brief points to return to later (Finfgeld-Connett, 2018a). Alternatively, you might
start with an index paper against which to compare all subsequent papers. Considerable
variation exists in how an index paper is identified. Some start with the earliest paper,
the most cited paper, or the richest in terms of data or ideas, etc. Garside et al. (2008)
describe how they chose ‘the only paper with a strong conceptual framework. Other
papers, while organising data under emergent themes, showed little attempt to provide
explanatory concepts’. Their focus on creating an explanatory model justified selecting an
index paper based on its conceptual richness. Alternatively, your topic may be suited to a
sampling approach (Suri, 2011); the literature may fall naturally into different disciplines
or schools of thought. By way of contrast, Toye et al. (2014; 2017) resisted choosing an
index paper for both a meta-ethnography and a mega-ethnography, citing concerns about
(i) being constrained by a priori concepts, (ii) difficulties in deciding which paper to use
as an index paper, particularly as it can potentially affect ‘the resulting interpretation’,

=== p. 272 ===

   and (iii) recognition that a review team may not ‘find the conceptually “richest” study at
   the outset’.

   FAQ 8.4 How many studies do I need for my qualitative synthesis?
   As with any such question there is no definitive answer. However, you should bear in mind several important considerations. The available data must fulfil the GRADE-CERQual criterion for
   adequacy, which factors in the number of studies and the richness/thickness of the data. If the
   objective is to explore the effect of context then you require sufficient thickness of contextual
   detail to distinguish between studies. If you want to generate theorising then you require sufficient richness of data to allow conceptual development. Certain qualitative syntheses methods favour certain thresholds of numbers of studies. Typically, aggregative methods such as
   meta-aggregation, framework synthesis and thematic synthesis can accommodate larger
   numbers of studies. Interpretative reviews require more interpretation and so, potentially,
   may be impaired by larger numbers of studies (Campbell et al., 2011). France et al. (2014)
   report an average of 21 papers (range 3–77) in their sample of meta-ethnographies. However,
   such distinctions are becoming less definitive as Toye et al., (2014) report analysing over 70
   papers by harnessing the functionality of NVivo software. Conversely, several commentators,
   such as Thorne (2015; 2017) and Bergdahl (2019), express concern at superficial analyses that
   may result from large numbers of thin studies, time constraints or relative analytical naivete
   of the reviewers.

   FAQ 8.5 What guidance is available for reporting qualitative synthesis?
   You should provide a rationale for how searching was conducted, following appropriate
   guidance/good practice for reporting literature searches, for example PRISMA-S (Rethlefsen
   et al., 2021) and STARLITE (Booth, 2006; 2016). In contrast, with quantitative systematic
   reviews and meta-analysis few published reporting guidelines exist for qualitative synthesis
   (France et al., 2014; Tong et al., 2012). The enhancing transparency in reporting the synthesis of qualitative research (ENTREQ) statement (Tong et al., 2012) was developed by a small
   international group of researchers to encourage transparency in the reporting of syntheses.
   The ENTREQ statement contains 21 items grouped into five domains: introduction; methods and methodology; literature search and selection; appraisal; and synthesis of findings.
   Uptake of the ENTREQ statement is relatively poor (France et al., 2014), perhaps reflecting
   its generic origins. In contrast, the eMERGe guidelines for meta-ethnography followed systematic processes of literature review and consensus development (France et al., 2019a).
   As a consequence, you may find the eMERGe guidelines a useful model even if you have
   not undertaken a meta-ethnography. Further details on reporting standards are given in
   Chapter 10.

Get more hands-on guidance!
Visit https://study.sagepub.com/booth3e for downloadable versions of the exercises, as well as
some suggested answers. You can also access a glossary, literature review templates, source trackers, and a collated list of online tools to help you put together a successful literature review.

=== p. 273 ===

                  suggestions for further information

Finfgeld-Connett D (2018) A Guide to Qualitative Meta-synthesis. London: Routledge.
Although targeted at ‘theory-generating meta-synthesis’ this book describes standard procedures for systematic reviews of qualitative research. It includes chapters that map closely to
the SALSA process.

Hannes K & Lockwood C (2011) Synthesizing Qualitative Research: Choosing the Right
   Approach. Chichester: Wiley.
Tackles the choices offered by qualitative synthesis methods. Devotes a chapter to each main
method of qualitative synthesis and walks through each methodology with a worked case
example.

Munn Z, Tufanaru C & Aromataris E (2014) JBI’s systematic reviews: data extraction and synthesis. American Journal of Nursing, 114(7): 49–54.
From a mini-series on systematic reviews from staff at the Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI), this
article covers data extraction; often neglected in step-by-step guides.

Ring N, Ritchie K, Mandava L & Jepson R (2010) A guide to synthesising qualitative research
   for researchers undertaking health technology assessments and systematic reviews. NHS
   Improvement, Scotland.
The first text to examine qualitative synthesis within the context of health technology assessment, this report provides a good cross-sectional view of qualitative synthesis.

SBU (2016) Evaluation and synthesis of studies using qualitative methods of analysis. Swedish
   Agency for Health Technology Assessment and Assessment of Social Services (SBU),
   Stockholm.
An accessible text from the SBU that provides a good contemporaneous view of current methods and issues.

Soilemezi D & Linceviciute S (2018) Synthesizing qualitative research: reflections and lessons
   learnt by two new reviewers. International Journal of Qualitative Methods. https://doi.
   org/10.1177/1609406918768014
Refreshingly open reflection from novice reviewers on challenges and pitfalls in planning and
conducting a QES. Particular challenges for new reviewers include how to identify relevant
research to answer the review question and pitfalls during screening and evaluation.

