=== chunk: gendler-2010-intuition-imagination-philosophical-methodology/ch1-galileo ===
title: Galileo and the Indispensability of Scientific Thought Experiment
source_pdf: docs/sources/gendler-2010-intuition-imagination-philosophical-methodology/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 32-52
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 21
plan_page_end: 41
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 21 ===

       Galileo and the Indispensability of
       Scientific Thought Experiment

In this chapter, I attempt to show that thought experiments play a distinctive role in
scientific inquiry. I contend that reasoning about particular entities within the context of
an imaginary scenario can lead to rationally justified conclusions that—given the same
initial information—would not be rationally justifiable on the basis of a straightforward
   Though the bulk of the essay involves a careful reconstruction of one of the most famous
thought experiments in the history of science—that by which Galileo is said to have refuted
the Aristotelian theory that heavy bodies fall faster than lighter ones—the conclusion it
offers is supposed to be a general one.
   I show that the standard argumentative reconstruction of Galileo’s thought experiment
fails to capture its justificatory power, and I suggest reasons to think that any other
argumentative reconstruction would fail in similar ways. I then argue that even if one
were to provide an argumentative reconstruction that did almost perfectly capture the
thought experiment’s demonstrative force, this would not show that the reason the
thought experiment is successful is because, deep down, it is nothing more than an
argument in disguise. I suggest that, to the contrary, the success of the thought experiment is a result of the way in which it invites the reader’s constructive participation,
describes particulars in ways that make manifest practical knowledge, and presents an
imaginary scenario wherein relevant features can be separated from those that are inessential to the question at issue.
  This essay and its successor—“Thought Experiments Rethought—and Reperceived”
(Ch. 2)—form a natural pair. For those who prefer to read only one of them, this essay,
which is more substantive and detailed, can be read as a self-standing piece.

                                               ***
This essay was first published in the British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 49/3 (1998),
397–424 and is reprinted with the kind permission of Oxford University Press. The version
below omits one section of the original article (}3.4, pp. 415–20), which contains a detailed
reconstruction of and response to arguments offered by John Norton and James Robert
Brown. (Interested readers can, of course, find that discussion in the original published
version.) The remainder of the text is unaltered except for the correction of minor typographical errors and stylistic infelicities, and the addition of some bibliographical and

=== p. 22 ===

supplementary material to certain footnotes (noted as such). As a result of reformatting,
several footnote numbers have changed. The original number of each footnote is noted in
[square brackets].

1. Argumentative Reconstruction

Philosophers who are opposed to all things spooky tend to think that thought
experiments in science are (at least in principle) eliminable, and that whatever
demonstrative force they have is the result of their being sound arguments dressed
up in heuristically appealing clothing. On such a view, a scientific thought experiment’s justificatory force comes from the fact that it can be reconstructed as an
argument with explicit premises that make no reference to imaginary particulars.
  My goal in this paper is to challenge this view by carefully examining one of
the most famous thought experiments in the history of science: that by which
Galileo is said to have refuted the Aristotelian theory that heavier bodies fall
faster than lighter ones. I will try to show that the thought-experimental format
of Galileo’s presentation plays an indispensable role in the persuasiveness of his
case against the Aristotelian, and that a similar degree of persuasiveness could
not be obtained on the grounds of explicit argument alone.

1.1. The Elimination Thesis
The view that thought experiments lead to justified conclusions because
they are arguments finds clear articulation and powerful defense in a pair of
papers by John Norton.1 In those papers, Norton puts forth a hypothesis about
thought experiments that he calls the Elimination Thesis. Paraphrasing slightly,
his thesis is this:
  The Elimination Thesis: Any conclusion reached by a (successful) scientific
  thought experiment will also be demonstrable by a non-thought-experimental argument.2

As initially formulated, the thesis is ambiguous; it is compatible with both a
weaker reading, which I will call the Dispensability Thesis, and a stronger
reading, which I will call the Derivativity Thesis (cf. Norton 1996: 354–8). In
order to formulate these versions, however, I need first to clarify what a number

  1
     [1] Norton 1991, 1996. [Note added in 2009: Norton continues to defend this view; cf.
Norton 2004a, 2004b.]
  2
     [2] Cf. Norton 1991: 131 and Norton 1996: 336. Note that although I am using Norton’s
articulation and defense of this thesis as a convenient jumping-off point, the specifics of his
position are not my target.

=== p. 23 ===

of terms in the thesis mean, and to describe briefly the sorts of arguments which
might be offered in its favor.

1.2. Clarification of Terminology
A number of terms in the thesis require further elaboration. Let me begin with
“thought experiment” and “non-thought-experimental argument.” To draw a
conclusion on the basis of a thought experiment is to make a judgment about
what would happen if the particular state of affairs described in some imaginary
scenario were actually to obtain.3 One might then use that judgment in
developing a more general theory, just as one might use the result of an
actual experiment. By contrast, to draw a conclusion on the basis of a nonthought-experimental argument is to be led by a process of inductive or deductive
reasoning from a set of explicit premises which make no reference to particular
hypothetical or counterfactual states of affairs to a correspondingly general
conclusion. Again, one might use that conclusion as the basis for endorsing
one or another general theory about the phenomena in question. So thought
experiments differ from non-thought-experimental arguments in two crucial
respects: first, they are not presented as arguments, but rather as invitations to
contemplate a way that the world might (have) be(en); and second, they make
essential reference to particular hypothetical or counterfactual states of affairs
(cf. Norton 1991: 229; Norton 1996: 336).
   What the Elimination Thesis says is that any good scientific thought experiment can be transformed into a non-thought-experimental argument without
loss of demonstrative force. Given the characterization just offered, what an
elimination will involve is first a process of argumentative reconstruction in
which the narrative presentation is replaced by a series of explicit premises
sufficient to establish the desired result, and then a process in which those
premises that make reference to hypotheticals, counterfactuals, and particulars
are replaced by premises in which no such reference is made. If the Elimination
Thesis is correct, such a process will preserve completely the thought experiment’s demonstrative force.
   What is meant by “demonstrative force”? I will suggest two problematic
readings and then one that I will endorse. If the claim that “any conclusion

  3
    [4] For other recent characterizations of (scientific) thought experiments see, for instance:
Bealer 1998; Brown 1986, Brown 1991a, 1991b, 1993a, 1993b, 1995; Carrier 1993; Gooding
1990, 1992, 1993, 1994; Hacking 1993; Humphreys 1993; Irvine 1991; Janis 1991; Kujundzic
1993; Laymon 1991; Lipton 1993; Massey 1991; Nersessian 1984, 1992, 1993; Norton 1991,
1993, 1996; Prudovsky 1989; Shepard 1994; Sorensen 1992a, 1992b; Wilkes 1988; as well as
other articles in Horowitz and Massey 1991. The locus classicus is, of course, Mach 1883/1960,
1897/1976; for other early discussions cf. also Hesse 1966; Koyré 1960/1968; Kuhn 1964;
Popper 1959/1992. [Added in 2009: For additional recent discussions, see Atkinson 2003;
Brendel 2004; Brown 2004a, 2004b; Davies 2007; DeMey 2006; Norton 2004a, 2004b;
Palmieri 2003, 2008; Peijnenburg and Atkinson 2003.]

=== p. 24 ===

reached by a good thought experiment will also be demonstrable by a nonthought-experimental argument” means no more than that in the reconstruction of a mature science, the conclusions that were (as a matter of fact) reached
by thought experiments can be derived from more fundamental principles by
means of inference schemes licensed within the science, then the thesis is
trivially true. Even if the development of Newtonian mechanics relied on a
series of crucial thought experiments, its textbook presentation might well
establish particular conclusions on the basis of more conventional forms of
   On the other hand, there is a reading of “demonstrative force” according to
which the thesis is trivially false. If the claim is taken to mean that—as a matter
of psychological fact—any conclusion that was reached by a good thought experiment might also have been demonstrated to the person who reached the conclusion by means of a non-thought-experimental argument, then the Elimination
Thesis is certainly untrue. None would doubt the important heuristic and illustrative role played by thought experiments in scientific exploration, and the crucial
tasks they play in instruction and informal demonstration.
   The proper reading of “demonstrative force” makes the Elimination Thesis
epistemologically interesting. On this reading, demonstrative force concerns
the role that thought experiments play in living bodies of knowledge: after the
moment of discovery and before the end of inquiry. It concerns whether a
particular conclusion based on a particular process of reasoning (thought experiment) is thereby justified—whether if such a process leads to true beliefs,
those beliefs should count as knowledge. So the issue raised by the Elimination
Thesis is this: can reasoning about (reasonably) specific entities within the
context of an imaginary scenario lead to rationally justified conclusions
that—given the same initial information—would not be rationally justifiable
on the basis of a straightforward argument? In the next section, I consider two
reasons that one might think such eliminations are possible.

1.3. The Negative Argument and the Positive Argument
The Elimination Thesis (that is, the thesis that thought experiments are dispensable) can be defended with two arguments, one negative, one positive.
So, for instance, John Norton argues (negatively) as follows: thought experiments must be arguments because there is nothing else for them to be:
“Thought experiments in physics provide or purport to provide us information
about the physical world. Since they are thought experiments rather than physical experiments, this information does not come from the reporting of new
physical data. Thus there is only one non-controversial source from which the
information can come: it is elicited from information we already have by an
identifiable argument” (Norton 1991: 129). Norton considers this position
almost trivial: “the alternative,” he writes, “is to suppose that thought

=== p. 25 ===

experiments provide some new and even mysterious route to knowledge of the
physical world” (Norton 1991: 129).4 So the negative argument contends that if
we have obtained new information about the empirical world without having
obtained new empirical information about the empirical world, the only way we
could have done so is by means of an argument.
   The positive reason that one might think that thought experiments are
just arguments in disguise is that “the analysis and appraisal of a thought experiment will involve reconstructing it explicitly as an argument,” so that “a good
thought experiment is a good argument, a bad thought experiment is a bad
argument” (Norton 1991: 131; Norton 1996: 335). So the positive argument
amounts to saying that if a thought experiment can be reconstructed as
an argument, then what it was all along was an argument.5 Even if the reason
I come to know something by contemplating a thought-experimental scenario
doesn’t seem to be because there is an argument into which the thought experiment can be reconstructed, it is. The reason my belief is justified is because, in the
end, the thought experiment was a disguised argument all along.

1.4. The Dispensability Thesis and the Derivativity Thesis
We are now in a position to recognize that the Elimination Thesis as originally
formulated and defended actually involves two distinct claims. These might be
stated as follows:
  The Dispensability Thesis: Any good scientific thought experiment can be
  replaced, without loss of demonstrative force, by a non-thought-experimental argument.
  The Derivativity Thesis: The justificatory force of any good scientific thought
  experiment can only be explained by the fact that it can be replaced, without
  loss of demonstrative force, by a non-thought-experimental argument.

  Loosely put, the Dispensability Thesis says that we can always get from here
to there without appeal to a thought experiment. If a thought experiment
legitimately transports us from one state of belief to another, a non-thoughtexperimental argument could too. Thought experiments may be convenient
and efficient ways of reaching conclusions about the physical world, but they
have only the advantage that a car has over walking; they get us where we want
to go much more quickly, but they don’t get us anywhere we couldn’t reach by
more pedestrian means.

  4
    [6] For an endorsement of this alternative, cf. Brown 1991a, 1991b, 1993a, 1993b, 1995.
[Added in 2009: Brown continues to defend this view; see Brown 2004a, 2004b.]
  5
    [7] “The workings and achievements of any thought experiment can be revealed and
captured fully in an explicit argument which employs the same resources” (Norton 1996:
339). Cf. also Norton 1996: 357–8.

=== p. 26 ===

   The Derivativity Thesis says that not only can any good scientific thought
experiment be replaced, without loss of demonstrative force, by a non-thoughtexperimental argument, but that to the extent that a good scientific
thought experiment has demonstrative force, it is because, deep down, the
thought experiment is an argument. We may be misled by the surface features
of the case to think that something non-argumentational is doing justificatory
work, but we are wrong. The reason the Dispensability Thesis is true is that all
that was ever justificatorially at play was something argumentative. What
looked like a car turned out to be propelled by foot power all along (like a
child’s go-car, or one of the vehicles on The Flintstones). So the Dispensability
Thesis says we can get by without what we commonly call thought experiments; the Derivativity Thesis tells us that we already do.
   In the next section, I challenge the Dispensability Thesis by showing that it
does not hold true of a widely acclaimed thought experiment of Galileo’s.
I choose this case for two reasons. First, since this particular example is generally
treated as the paradigm of an effective thought experiment, diagnosing
the source of its success is itself a worthwhile endeavor.6 Second, challenging
the Dispensability Thesis in this way allows me to shed light on the Derivativity
Thesis as well. Obviously, if the Dispensability Thesis is false, the Derivativity
Thesis is too; the more interesting question is whether some alternative
explanation can be offered of the thought experiment’s success. I try to say
something positive about this question in }}3 and 4.

2. Galileo’s Thought Experiment and its Reconstruction

2.1. Galileo’s Thought Experiment
Perhaps the most famous thought experiment in the history of Western science
is the thought experiment with which Galileo is credited with having refuted
the Aristotelian view that the speed with which a body falls is directly

  6
     [8] For some of the many discussions of this and related thought experiments of Galileo, cf.
Brown 1986, 1991a, 1991b, 1993a, 1993b, 1995; Cargile 1987; Clement 1983; Koyré 1939/
1979, 1960/1968; Kuhn 1964; Norton 1996; Prudovsky 1989; Sorensen 1992a. [Added in 2009:
See also the detailed discussions in Palmieri 2005a, 2005b, 2008. Thanks to David M. Miller for
alerting me to this work.] In my discussion below, I follow the somewhat unfortunate practice
of considering this thought experiment outside of both its historical and textual contexts. As a
partial remedy to this misleading presentation, I refer the reader to some of the many general
discussions of Galileo’s work and its context; one might fruitfully begin with: Butts and Pitt
1978; Claggett 1959; Clavelin 1974; Cooper 1935; Damerow et al. 1992; E. J. Dijksterhuis 1961;
Drake 1978, 1989, 1990. See also sources listed in the next three footnotes. [Added in 2009: For
recent meticulous discussion and extensive references, see Palmieri 2008.]

=== p. 27 ===

proportional to its weight.7 The thought experiment appears in his last and
most mature work, the Discourse Concerning Two New Sciences, in the context of
a more general discussion of the possibility and nature of motion in a void.8
Galileo’s goal in the section as a whole is to establish that “if one were to remove
entirely the resistance of the medium, all materials would descend with equal
speed” (Galilei 1638/1989: 116);9 the thought experiment in question leads to
the weaker conclusion that “both great and small bodies, of the same [material ],
are moved with like speeds” (Galilei 1638/1989: 109, italics added, bracketed
word replaced).
   The view that Galileo is challenging is that “moveables differing in heaviness
are moved in the same medium with unequal speeds, which maintain to one
another the same ratio as their weights [gravità]” (Galilei 1638/1989: 106). That
is, he is challenging the view that heavier bodies fall faster than lighter ones,
and that they do so in direct proportion to their heaviness. On the version
Galileo takes himself to be opposing, the proportionality is linear: “a moveable
ten times as heavy as another, is moved ten times as fast” as the other (Galilei
1638/1989: 106).10
   The famous thought experiment, rephrased slightly, is the following. Imagine that a heavy and a light body are strapped together and dropped from a
significant height.11 What would the Aristotelian expect to be the natural speed
of their combination? On the one hand, the lighter body should slow down the
heavier one while the heavier body speeds up the lighter one, so their combination should fall with a speed that lies between the natural speeds of its
components. (That is, if the heavy body falls at a rate of 8, and the light body

     7
       [9] Challenges to the Aristotelian thesis—both empirical and conceptual—had appeared
in a number of mid- and late 16th-c. works. (For relevant passages, see: [for Cardan] L. Cooper
1935: 7–77; Damerow et al. 1992: 365; [for Tartaglia] Drake and Drabkin 1969: 63–143, esp. 120
ff.; Damerow et al. 1992: 378; [for Benedetti] Drake and Drabkin 1969: 147–237, esp. 206, and
31–41; E. J. Dijksterhuis 1961: 269–71; Drake 1989: 27–30; [for Stevin] L. Cooper 1935: 77–80;
E. J. Dijksterhuis 1961: 324–9.)
     8
       [10] Galileo himself had produced a less conclusive version of the famous thought
experiment as early as 1590 in an unfinished and unpublished dialogue on motion; cf. L.
Cooper 1935: 80–90; Drake and Drabkin 1969: 331–77; Galilei 1590/1960: 26–38, esp. 29
(National Edition, p. 265). For an interesting discussion of whether Galileo ever actually
performed such an experiment, cf. L. Cooper 1935; Drake 1978, 1989, 1990; Drake and
Drabkin 1969; Koyré 1960/1968; Segre 1989. Since my primary purpose in this essay is not
historical, I will focus only on Galileo’s 1638 presentation of the refutation, bracketing the
interesting question (a question not without philosophical interest) of why it was that such a
simple and obvious mistake apparently remained part of the West’s scientific world view for
nearly 2,000 years.
     9
       [11] Here and elsewhere, I have made use of Drake’s 1974/1989 translation of the Discorsi.
For easy cross-referencing with the more widely available (though less reliable) Crew and De
Salvio translation, page references are to the National Edition (except where noted).
   10
       [12] Cf. Aristotle Physics 215a24–216a21; On the Heavens 301b.
   11
       [13] Note that in the remarks that follow, all references to bodies should be understood as
referring to bodies of the same material. For the purposes of my discussion, this constraint is
irrelevant.

=== p. 28 ===

at a rate of 4, then their combination should fall at a rate between the two
(cf. Galilei 1638/1989: 107).) On the other hand, since the weight of the two
bodies combined is greater than the weight of the heavy body alone, their
combination should fall with a natural speed greater than that of the heavy
body. (That is, if the heavy body falls at a rate of 8 and the light body at a rate
of 4, their combination should fall at a rate greater than 8.) But then the
combined body is predicted to fall both more quickly, and more slowly,
than the heavy body alone (cf. Galilei 1638/1989: 107–8). The way out of this
paradox is to assume that the natural speed with which a body falls is independent of its weight: “both great and small bodies . . . are moved with like speeds”
(Galilei 1638/1989: 109).

2.2. Reconstruction of the Galileo Case
Transformed into an argument that conforms to the strictures of the Elimination Thesis, Galileo’s reasoning can be reconstructed as follows.12 The first
claim of the Aristotelian is that:

(1)   Natural speed is mediative.
That is, natural speed is a property such that if a body A has natural speed s1,
and a body B has natural speed s2, the natural speed of the combined body A-B
will fall between s1 and s2.
  The second premise of the reconstruction is that:

(2)   Weight is additive.
That is, weight is a property such that if body A has weight w1, and body B has
weight w2, the weight of the combined body A-B will be equal to the sum of w1
and w2.
  From these two premises (plus the assumption that not all weights and
natural speeds are either zero or infinite), it follows that:

(3)   Natural speed is not directly proportional to weight.

For the first is a mediative property, whereas the second is an additive property,
and a mediative property cannot be directly proportional to one that is additive.
Furthermore, the only way to maintain (1), (2), and (3) simultaneously is to
assume that all natural speeds are the same. Then weight might be additive and
natural speed (in a vacuous sense) mediative, with no contradiction thereby
implied. Thus natural speed is shown to be independent of weight.

          12
               [14] For Norton’s reconstruction of this case, cf. Norton 1996: 340–5.

=== p. 29 ===

2.3. Four Ways Out for the Aristotelian
If the Dispensability Thesis is true, then Galileo’s thought experiment should be
replaceable by some non-thought-experimental argument without loss of demonstrative force. My goal in the next two sections (2.3 and 2.4) is to show that
the reconstruction presented in }2.2 is not such an argument.13
   I begin my case by pointing out that there are a number of “ways out” for the
defender of the view that natural speed is directly correlated with weight—a
view which, for the sake of convenience, I will call the Aristotelian view. These
ways out involve denying premises (1) and (2) by proposing a series of alternative hypotheses about the physical properties of strapped-bodies, that is, bodies
of the sort described by the thought experiment. The point of talking about
these ways out is to show that there are ways to maintain the negation of
(3) by adopting alternatives to (1) and (2), and adopting these may well
be less disruptive to the Aristotelian picture than giving up (3). What I will
suggest below is that these ways out, though logically available, run counter
to certain tacit knowledge about the physical world. It is for this reason
that, when the case is presented as a thought experiment, they do not even
occur to us. To block them as moves in a straight argument, however, requires
metaphysical commitments that seem not to be at play in the thought experiment itself. What these commitments are, and what role I think they actually
play in Galileo’s reasoning is a point I will turn to after presenting the four
ways out.
   The first way out would be for the Aristotelian to deny that the properties in
question are determinate for strapped-together bodies in one of the following
two ways.

(4) Natural speed is not physically determinate for strapped-bodies.14
(5) Weight is not physically determinate for strapped-bodies.
That is, she might reject (1) or (2) on the grounds that they presuppose that
natural speed and weight are properties that apply universally, even to bodies
that are in some way monstrous.15 Since strapped-bodies are odd entities, she
might say, they need not be governed by the sorts of laws that govern ordinary
objects. In particular, they need not have determinate natural speeds or
weights.

  13
     [15] Below I suggest reasons for thinking that this will be true for any argumentative
reconstruction that conforms to the strictures of the elimination thesis.
  14
     [16] For a version of this “way out,” cf. Koyré 1960/1968: 51.
  15
     [17] Galileo preemptively deals with this by getting a concession from Simplicio straight
away that “for every heavy falling body there is a speed determined by nature such that this
cannot be increased or diminished except by using force or opposing some impediment to it”
(Galilei 1638/1989: 107); cf. also Drake’s n. 40 in Galilei 1638/1989 at (modern pagination)
p. 66.

=== p. 30 ===

  The third way out for the Aristotelian would be to avoid the conflict between
(1) and (2) by saying that there is a fact of the matter about whether a strapped-body is one body or two, and that its physical properties in falling will depend
on the answer to this question. She might say:

(6)   Natural speed and weight are mediative for strapped-bodies that are united.
      Natural speed and weight are additive for strapped-bodies that are unified.
That is, sometimes when two bodies are strapped together, they are merely
united and remain, as a matter of fact, two objects; sometimes, when they are
strapped together, they are unified and form, as a matter of fact, a single object.
In the first case, both weight and speed will be mediative; the combined body
will have a weight intermediate between those of the two original bodies, and
fall with a natural speed that lies between the two original speeds. In the second
case, both properties will be additive; the weight of the unified body will be
equal to the sum of the weights of its component parts, and its natural speed
correspondingly equal to the natural speeds of the two combined. Since the
mediativity of the properties holds only with respect to united pairs of objects,
and the additivity only with respect to unified single objects, there is no way
that the Aristotelian can be forced to a contradiction. What she is forced to
accept, however, are radical discontinuities in nature. A body, united, might be
falling steadily at a rate of, say, 6, and suddenly, should its parts happen to
become unified, begin falling at a rate of, say, 12.
   But the Aristotelian can avoid the problem of discontinuity. A fourth way
would be for her to say that, given two bodies that fall together, there is a fact of
the matter about their degree of connectedness, and that this determines their
physical properties when falling. The claim would be:

(7)   Natural speed and weight for strapped-bodies are determined by a degree of
      connectedness (C) such that the speed/weight of B1-strapped-to-B2 where B1
      has w1 and B2 has w2 will be: (C)(w1þw2) þ (1-C)(w1þw2)/2.16

We let C measure the degree of connectedness between the two bodies; that is, we
let it be a number between zero and one that corresponds to the degree to which
two bodies that fall together are unified: if the bodies are completely unified, C
will take a value of 1; if the bodies are completely disunified (that is, united), C will
take a value of 0. For intermediate cases, the value will be between these two, and
the speed and weight of the combined body will lie between the mean and the
sum of the two initial values. So if the two bodies are completely unified, the

  16
     [18] To keep the equation minimally complicated, I have made a number of trivial
simplifying assumptions. I have assumed that the units for measuring weight and natural
speed correspond so that the number representing an object’s weight is the same as the
number representing its natural speed; and I have assumed that the natural speed of two
merely unified bodies is the mean of their individual natural speeds.

=== p. 31 ===

additive law will apply completely; if the bodies are merely unified, the mediative
law will apply throughout; and for intermediate cases, some proportional average will be found between them. Thus the assumption that natural speed is a
function of weight can be maintained, and it can be maintained without violation of continuity. How can this be done? It can be done under the assumption
that degree of connectedness is a relevant physical property.
   That this way out too seems not to be a live option brings us to the point
where I will suggest my alternative explanation of what is going on.

2.4. What the Reconstruction Misses
Let’s begin by thinking about ways in which the four ways out might be
blocked. And let’s start with the most obvious: we might make appeal to two
broad, defeasible, tacit assumptions, each of which captures an important
feature of our representation of experienced reality. One is that, for any body
that one might encounter, there is a determinate fact concerning its weight and
natural speed. That is:

(8) Natural speed and weight are physically determined.
The other is that there is no determinate fact whether strapped-bodies are one
object or two. That is:

(9) Entification is not physically determined.
What (8) says is that a particular question about natural properties has a
determinate answer. Any body, no matter how oddly shaped, will have a
particular weight and a particular natural speed that are fixed by the world.
What (9) says is that a particular question of entification has an indeterminate
answer. Whether we consider a strapped-together body to be a single object, or
two objects held together by a strap, or indefinitely many objects held together
by internal forces, is merely a question of the aspect under which we choose
to view that object. The answer to the question “how many objects?” does not
follow from any physical property we might discover; it is a question about our
words, not a question about the world.
   These two premises are sufficient to eliminate the “ways out” enumerated
above. If (8) holds, then (4) and (5) are not available as lines of escape; if (9)
holds, then neither (6) nor (7) can be appealed to as a means of avoiding the
Galilean conclusion. And the way in which they eliminate (4)–(7) is very
different from the way that a simple reassertion of (1) and (2) would. They
show not only that there is something wrong with (4)–(7) as descriptions of the
way the world is, but why there is something wrong with them. They show what
it is about our tacit understanding of physical reality, and about our instincts
concerning plausible candidates for physically relevant and irrelevant properties, that is missed by someone who appeals to (4) or (5) or (6) or even (7).

=== p. 32 ===

   What this reveals is that the initial reconstruction of the Galilean thought
experiment (as presented in }2.2) fails to capture what is really doing the work in
the case. As hypotheses about the ways strapped-bodies might behave in fall, (4),
(5), (6), and especially (7) are in principle available as alternatives to (1) and (2);
just as natural speed might be mediative and weight additive, it might be that both
natural speed and weight depend on the degree to which the two bodies are
connected. So if (1)–(3) were truly capturing what is going on in the Galilean
thought experiment, there would be ways out for the Aristotelian that would
allow her at least to shift the burden of proof back to the Galilean.
   That these ways out do not seem available when the thought experiment is
presented in its unreconstructed form shows that this eliminative reconstruction
has failed to capture its original demonstrative force. (What has been lost is the way
in which, by evoking tacit knowledge about how falling bodies actually behave,
the thought experiment preemptively precludes such ways out.) Accordingly,
I tried to come up with a reconstruction sufficiently strong to rule out (4)–(7) in
a similarly categorical and decisive manner. This involved appeal to two rather
comprehensive and metaphysical-sounding principles, namely (8) and (9). (8) and
(9) give background support to (1) and (2) and thereby help to establish (3).
   But just as (1) and (2) are too weak to capture the way in which alternative
hypotheses concerning fall are ruled out by the thought experiment, (8) and (9)
are too strong. They represent approximate articulations of defeasible assumptions about the physical world. But as they stand, they articulate principles that
have less certainty than the conclusion they are taken to support. Prior to
contemplation of the case Galileo describes, the Aristotelian may be committed
to something like (8) and something like (9), but he is certainly not committed to
them unmodified. To reconstruct the case as an explicit argument with some
version of (8) and (9) among the premises would require enumerating outright
their defeasability conditions. But this is something he does not know how
to do. Contemplation of the case Galileo describes brings him to see that these
principles are not defeated in this case. And it is this recognition that serves as
the basis for the case’s power. No austere argumentative reconstruction will
be able to do this, because part of the thought experiment’s function is to bring
the Aristotelian to accept certain premises. In the next section, I will discuss
what makes belief in these premises new, and what makes it justified.

3. Denying the Dispensability and Derivativity Theses

3.1. Rejecting Reconstruction: What the Thought Experiment Does
If the Dispensability Thesis were correct, then the conclusion established by
Galileo’s thought experiment—that “both great and small bodies . . . are moved
with like speeds” (Galilei 1638/1989: 109)—should be demonstrable by means

=== p. 33 ===

of a non-thought-experimental argument. “Demonstrable” here means: rationally justifiable on the basis of the same background conditions. So let us spell
out what the background conditions in question are.
   For the Aristotelian, daily experience seems to confirm the theory that heavier bodies fall faster than lighter ones. Just as the Galilean sees cases where
lighter bodies fall more slowly than heavy ones as exceptional, so the Aristote-lian sees as crying out for explanation those cases where the rate of fall is
(nearly) simultaneous. So, when gold beaten into a very thin leaf reaches the
ground more slowly than a solid lump of the same material, the Galilean must
posit some factor that explains the divergence of this result from the generally
expected outcome (Galilei 1638/1989: 109). Similarly, when the Aristotelian
sees two stones of very different weights fall to the ground with like speeds, the
circumstance requires diagnosis and explanation.
   So far all I have pointed out is the possibility of maintaining theoretical
commitments in the face of apparent counter-evidence. This can be done by
appealing to additional principles that explain away anomalous data by
showing that the phenomena at issue are subject to the fundamental principle
in question, but that the world’s complexity has prevented them from manifesting this. So the Galilean might appeal to air resistance, the Aristotelian to
the fact that the bodies have not been dropped from a height sufficiently
great.17 Such explaining-away of recalcitrant exceptions is not a desperate
move by a failing paradigm; it is a fundamental element of doing normal
science in a non-ideal world.18
   The point of this discussion is to give a better sense of the background conditions under which the argumentative reconstruction must be demonstratively
forceful if the Dispensability Thesis is to be shown to hold in this case. The thesis
tells us that some non-thought-experimental reconstruction of the case Galileo
presents should be able to do the same thing that the thought-experimental

  17
      [20] In Galileo’s dialogue, when Salviati points out that a rock of two pounds and a rock of
twenty pounds will strike the ground nearly simultaneously when dropped from a height of
one or two hundred feet, Simplicio retorts that this may just be a result of not having given the
objects enough falling-time for the differences to become apparent (see Galilei 1638/1989:
109–10). Simplicio says: “Perhaps from very great heights, of thousands of bracchia,
[discrepancies] would follow which [are] not seen at these lesser heights.” That is, Simplicio
suggests that perhaps the reason we do not observe the sorts of differences which Aristotle’s
theory predicts is that we are making observations under non-idealized circumstances, and that
were we to eliminate distorting elements—like the fact that the fall is only a few hundred feet—
the true phenomena would reveal themselves. Galileo provides Salviati with a rather sharp
retort (Galilei 1638/1989: 110). See also (pagination here refers to the modern text) Galilei
1638/1989: 69 n. 44.
  18
      [21] Of course, it is a commonplace in the history of science that at a certain point the
burden of positing literal or metaphoric epicycles becomes too great, and the theory—especially
when there is a simpler alternative available—collapses under the weight of its own internal
complexity. But it is a similarly well-established commonplace in philosophy that theories are
underdetermined by evidence, and that extra-scientific considerations do some of the work in
determining theory choice.

=== p. 34 ===

version does: lead the Aristotelian from the same background assumptions to the same
rationally justified conclusions. The standard reconstruction presented in }2.2 fails
in this regard, as does the strengthened version presented in }2.4. And, I contend,
any argument satisfying the Elimination Thesis is likely to fail in the same way.
   Why? Because prior to the thought experiment, the Aristotelian is explicitly
committed to the negation of (3), and this background commitment serves as a
filter through which apparently contrary evidence will inevitably be reinterpreted. Any argument which satisfies the Elimination Thesis (that is, any
argument with explicit premises which make no reference to particular hypothetical or counterfactual states of affairs) can be reframed by the Aristotelian as
a reductio. (1) or (2) or (8) or (9) will simply be denied, once their implications are
made evident. What is remarkable about the thought-experimental presentation is that it is able to undermine this framework-shaping assumption.
   So I conclude, tentatively, that the Dispensability Thesis (and a fortiori the
Derivativity Thesis) is false. Suppose, however, that somehow it were possible to
come up with an argumentative reconstruction that almost exactly captures the
strength and limits I have attributed to Galileo’s thought experiment.19 Would
we then be justified in accepting the deeper methodological claim put forth in
the Derivativity Thesis: that the justificatory force of whatever beliefs I hold via
thought experiment is a function of the thought experiment’s argumentational
essence? In the next section (3.2), I offer reasons for thinking that the answer to
this question is “no.”

3.2 Rejecting the Positive Argument: What Makes these Beliefs New?
The Derivativity Thesis says that the justificatory force of any good scientific
thought experiment can only be explained by the fact that it can be replaced,
without loss of demonstrative force, by a non-thought-experimental argument.
So rejection of the thesis can take two forms: denying that the justificatory force
of a particular scientific thought experiment can be explained this way, and
denying that it can only be explained this way. The simplest way of doing the
former, of course, would be to show that the Dispensability Thesis is not true of
some thought experiment; obviously, if there is no non-thought-experimental
argument with which the thought experiment can be replaced without loss of
demonstrative force, then the justificatory force of the thought experiment
cannot be explained by the possibility of such replacement. But for the sake
of argument, I am supposing that the Dispensability Thesis is (at least approximately) true. This leaves two avenues for denying the Derivativity Thesis:
denying that the argumentative reconstruction explains the justificatory force

  19
      [22] Suppose, for instance, we were to enumerate the defeasibility conditions of (8) and
(9), and we included these modified versions as premises alongside (1) and (2).

=== p. 35 ===

of some thought experiment at all, and denying that it explains such justificatory force entirely.
   As I discussed above (}1.3), two sorts of defense are offered for the Derivativity
Thesis. The negative argument contends that thought experiments are arguments because there is nothing else for them to be; the positive argument
contends that thought experiments are arguments because their “analysis and
appraisal” involves explicit argumentative reconstruction. In this section I will
address the positive thesis, suggesting that it fails to get at what is most interesting about thought experimental reasoning; in the final section, I offer some
thoughts about what sorts of alternative justifications are available such that
the negative thesis too is untenable.
   It is a mistake, I contend, to think that the reason conclusions to thought
experiments are justified is because thought experiments have argumentational
analogues (if indeed they do). Rather, I want to suggest that the Aristotelian
comes to have novel justified true beliefs about the empirical world not because
he has (whether he knows it or not) followed along the path of a recognized
argument form, but rather because he has performed an act of introspection
that brings to light heretofore inarticulated and (because he lacked a theoretical
framework in which to make sense of them) implausible tacit beliefs. There
are two things that I need to show myself able to explain. The first is how it is
that knowledge has been gained. In what way is it that the Aristotelian has come
to believe something new? The second is how it is that knowledge has been
gained. In what way is it that the Aristotelian has come to believe something
justified? I will answer the first in the remainder of this section, and the second
in }3.3.
   In addressing the issue of novelty, I will begin with brief remarks about what
I think is not at issue, and then say something about where I think the important questions rest. One might say that the beliefs are not new since, in some
sense, the Aristotelian had access to them before. After all, he has acquired no
new information about the external world; all he has done is reshuffle tacit
beliefs he already held, coming to see their implications. But this view of what
makes knowledge new is surely too stringent; it would, among other things,
rule out all mathematical reasoning as a potential source of new knowledge. On
the other hand, it seems too weak to say that a belief is new if it merely results
from putting together two explicitly held beliefs that have not, for the individual in question, been previously connected. If I believe that snow is white and
I believe that crows are black, but I have never thought about the two at the
same time, it seems wrong to say that the belief that snow-is-white-and-crowsare-black should count as a new belief for me.20 In any case, without spelling out

    20
       [23] Except under very odd circumstances. Suppose I believe that crows are black because
I live in a village where there are crows, and I have seen many of them. I also believe that snow is
white, because I have read about it in books. In my village, it is taboo to think about black things

=== p. 36 ===

precisely what it is that makes some beliefs new and others mere implications,
there is a simple reason to think the Aristotelian’s belief that the speed at which
a body falls is independent of its weight should count as a new belief for him:
Until recently he was explicitly committed to the truth of its negation. This
alone suggests that—whatever the implicatory relation between his prior commitments and this view about natural speed—the belief should count as new.
   But there is a deeper and more interesting way that the belief is new, and that
is the following. The thought experiment that Galileo presents leads the Aris-totelian to a reconfiguration of his conceptual commitments of a kind that lets
him see familiar phenomena in a novel way. What the Galilean does is provide
the Aristotelian with conceptual space for a new notion of the kind of thing
natural speed might be: an independently ascertainable constant rather than a
function of something more primitive (that is, rather than as a function of
weight). It is in this way, by allowing the Aristotelian to make sense of a
previously incomprehensible concept, that the thought experiment has led
him to a belief that is properly taken as new.
   What this suggests is that the Derivativity Thesis is missing the point of what
makes the Galileo case work as it does. The recognition that natural speed is
independent of weight comes not from tracing the implications of antecedent
commitments to (1) and (2), which, after all, lead to the denial of a position to
which the Aristotelian is explicitly committed (and thence to retreats such as
the four ways out). The recognition comes from the sudden realization, on the
part of the Aristotelian, of the conceptual possibility of a certain sort of physical
property. Prior to contemplation of the case, there was no room on the Aristo-telian picture for the thought that natural speed might be constant, not varying—that it might be dependent not on some specific features of the body in
question, but only on the fact that it is a body at all.21 After contemplation of
the case, there seems to be no conceptual space for the view that it might be
variable.

and white things at the same time, because this is thought to allow the evil spirit access to the
soul. One day, I leave my village for the north, and I observe a crow circling above a field of
snow. I find the image aesthetically striking, and I ask myself why this is so. In analyzing my
response to the visual experience I am having, I realize with a start: “Snow is white and crows
are black.” In such a case, it seems plausible to suggest that this is a new belief.
   21
      [24] To get a sense of how odd this transition is, try thinking about weight as something
dependent not on the specifics of the body in question, but as something constant for all
bodies. (That is, to ascertain a body’s weight, we would not need to know anything more about
it than the simple fact than it is a body.) Clearly this would be a major conceptual readjustment;
one might even be inclined to say that we aren’t talking about weight anymore, since whatever
sort of thing weight is, it is surely something that depends upon specific features of the bodies
to which it applies. The analogy is not perfect, since part of what happens as a result of thinking
about the Galileo case is that it becomes apparent that there is no physical application for the
Aristotelian idea of natural speed; like phlogiston, it disappears into the ether of abandoned
concepts.

=== p. 37 ===

   One of the things that enables this rather striking shift in the representation of
physical reality is that the Aristotelian recognizes that there are experientially
possible objects—strapped-together bodies—for which the defeasability conditions of (8) and (9) are not met (that is, objects of which (8) and (9) hold true),
and that these are objects for which his old notion of natural speed simply does not
make sense. If entification is arbitrary and natural speed and weight are fixed by
the world, then a feature-dependent notion of natural speed is just plain incoherent. So one way of thinking about how the thought experiment works is this:
it brings the Aristotelian to recognize the inadequacy of his conceptual framework
for dealing with phenomena which—through the contemplation of this imaginary case—he comes to recognize as always having been part of his world.
   What this suggests is that “the analysis and appraisal of a thought experiment” need not “involve reconstructing it explicitly as an argument,” in such a
way that “a good thought experiment is a good argument, a bad thought
experiment is a bad argument” (Norton 1991: 129; Norton 1996: 335). After
all, the argument from (1) and (2) to (3) is no better or worse than the argument
from (not-3) to (not-1) or (not-2). Like an experiment, part of what makes a
thought experiment good or bad is the validity of the procedure by which the
same result can be repeatedly obtained. But another thing that distinguishes
good thought experiments from bad is their ability to direct the reader’s attention to inadequacies in her conceptual scheme that she herself recognizes
immediately, as soon as they are pointed out to her. It is this, I want to suggest,
that grounds her new beliefs. Of course, I have said nothing so far about what
might make these beliefs justified. It is to this issue that I turn in }3.3.

3.3. Rejecting the Negative Argument: What Makes
     these Beliefs Knowledge?
Thought experiments work in a variety of ways. By describing appropriately
selected imaginary scenarios, they provide contexts within which sense can be
made of previously incomprehensible conceptual distinctions.22 This happens
when two features that are constantly conjoined in our representations of all
actual cases are imaginatively separated in the thought-experimental scenario
in a way that shows them to have been isolatable all along. And by describing
specific situations, thought experiments, like analogical reasoning in general,
can justify conclusions about particular cases without explicit or implicit appeal
to more general absolute principles.23 Many of the higher-level principles by

  22
     [25] By this I mean they do something like what the answer to a riddle does in making
suddenly intelligible what previously appeared to be a nonsensical description. Cf. Cavell 1979:
156–7. [Added in 2009: This phenomenon is closely related to psychological work on contextual
prerequisites for understanding. (See e.g. Bransford and Johnson 1972; Tse et al. 2007.)]
  23
     [26] For an articulation and defense of such a view of analogical reasoning, cf. Sunstein
1993, 1996.

=== p. 38 ===

which we negotiate the world are defeasible, and the determination of their
applicability to particular situations must be made on a case-by-case basis.
By bringing the reader to focus on particulars, thought experiments can help
her distinguish warranted from unwarranted applications of the principle in
question.24
   So far, however, this has little to do with justification. After all, as Norton
would ask, if the thought experiment is not an argument, why should we put
faith in its conclusion? What I want to explore in this closing section is one
possible answer: that thought experiments rely on a certain sort of constructive
participation on the part of the reader, and that the justificatory force of the
thought experiment actually comes from the fact that it calls upon the reader to
perform what I will call an experiment-in-thought.
   An experiment-in-thought is an actual experiment; the person conducting
the experiment asks herself: “What would I say/judge/expect were I to encounter circumstances XYZ?” and then finds out the (apparent) answer. This technique is common in linguistics, where the methodology is used to ascertain the
grammaticality of sentences, the meanings of phrases, the taxonomic categories of words, and so on.25 And it is, on one view at least, a central element
of moral reasoning: we think about particular imaginary cases, observe the
judgments that they evoke in us, and use these judgments as fixed points in
developing our moral theories.26
   How does this connect with the Galileo case? What kind of experiment-inthought plays a role there? Answer: by thinking about the case in question, we
discover what sorts of motions and objects we think are possible in the world.
Do we think objects can be strapped together? Yes, we do. Do we think objects
fall with radical discontinuities in speed? No, we think they do not. Do we think
entification is something that is fixed by the world? No, we do not. Do we think
weight and natural speed are fixed by the world? Yes, we do. We come to recognize

  24
         [27] This often happens when the particulars are sufficiently well sketched to evoke
practical as well as theoretical responses. [Added in 2009: This footnote was written in 1996,
but obviously foreshadows some of the suggestions made in later writings, in particular in
“Philosophical Thought Experiments, Intuitions, and Cognitive Equilibrium” (2007; Ch. 6)
and the two alief essays (2008a, 2008b; Chs. 13 and 14).]
   25
         [28] Cf. Thomason 1991: 247: “When linguists want to test hypotheses about the structure
of a particular language, their methodology crucially involves thought experiments in
a . . . literal sense: real experiments carried out in thinking.”
   26
         [29] To choose an example nearly at random, consider Thomson 1986: 257: “it is . . . our
moral views about examples, stories, and cases which constitute . . . data for moral theorizing.”
[Added in 2009: If one of the tools for moral theorizing is to “think about particular imaginary
cases, observe the judgments that they evoke in us, and use these judgments as fixed points in
developing our moral theories,” then it might be valuable to make systematic use of samples
containing more than one subject. For a defense of this technique as an extension of traditional
philosophical methodology, along with numerous examples of its application, see Knobe and
Nichols 2008.]

=== p. 39 ===

that we have these beliefs by contemplating the imaginary case in question;
thinking about the case is what brings us to the realization that we believe what
we do.27 And—and this is where the justificatory work comes in—the fact that
we have these beliefs gives us prima facie warrant to think that they are true.
   But why? Why should we think that our pre-theoretical beliefs about the
structure of the physical world are reliable? In the Science of Mechanics, a few
pages after coining the expression Gedankenexperiment, Mach writes:
Everything which we observe imprints itself uncomprehended and unanalyzed in our
percepts and ideas, which then, in their turn, mimic the process of nature in their
most general and most striking features. In these accumulated experiences we possess a
treasure-store which is ever close at hand, and of which only the smallest portion is
embodied in clear articulate thought. The circumstance that it is far easier to resort to
these experiences than it is to nature herself, and that they are, notwithstanding this, free,
in the sense indicated, from all subjectivity, invests them with high value. (Mach 1883/
1960: 36)

So one possible explanation is the one Mach gives. We have a store of unarticulated knowledge of the world which is not organized under any theoretical
framework. Argument will not give us access to that knowledge, because the
knowledge is not propositionally available. Framed properly, however, a
thought experiment can tap into it, and—much like an ordinary experiment—allow us to make use of information about the world which was, in
some sense, there all along, if only we had known how to systematize it into
patterns of which we are able to make sense.28
   This, of course, is the beginning not the end of an answer to the question. But
it is sufficient for the modest aim of this essay. What I have been trying to show
is that something besides argument might give justificatory force to thought
experimental reasoning. The alternative I have proposed has been this: By

   27
      [Note added in 2009: This suggests that the analogy to experiments-in-thought in linguistic
(and perhaps moral) theorizing may be somewhat inapt, for two related reasons. The first is that
whereas judgments about grammaticality (and perhaps morality) are to some degree constitutive
of the phenomenon under investigation (the fact that normal speakers judge a sentence to
be grammatical is part of what makes it the case that the sentence is grammatical), judgments
about physics are not (in the relevant sense) constitutive of facts about physics. The second
is that whereas in the linguistics case the role played by the experiment-in-thought is, loosely,
to provide data for theorizing (so that asking someone else to make the judgment would be as
good as asking ourselves), in the Galileo case the role played by the experiment-in-thought
is, loosely, to bring the contemplator to a certain sort of self-knowledge as a result of
contemplating the case (so that second-hand reporting of another’s results cannot do the work
of first-hand self-engagement). I return to some of these issues in “Thought Experiments
Rethought—and Reperceived” (2004; Ch. 2) and “Philosophical Thought Experiments,
Intuitions, and Cognitive Equilibrium” (2007; Ch. 6).]
   28
      [30] For further discussion of these themes, cf. Kuhn 1964. [Added in 2009: For exploration
of some of these issues in the context of recent work on explanation and learning, see
Lombrozo 2006.]

=== p. 40 ===

focusing on imaginary scenarios and making reference to particulars, thought
experiments can provide a fulcrum for the reorganization of conceptual commitments; this explains how they can provide us with novel information
without empirical input. And by bringing the reader to perform experimentsin-thought, thought experiments can lead us to reject shaky (and ultimately
false) theoretical commitments in light of newly systematized but previously
inarticulable knowledge about the way the world is.
   The justificatory force of thought experiments is thus parasitic on the extent
to which the messy twisted web of background beliefs that underpin our
navigation of the world are rightly considered knowledge. To establish this,
on coherentist or evolutionary or empiricist grounds, would be an enormous
undertaking, and one which I will not even begin to endeavor here.29 But
I hope I have given you some sense, at least, of why I am not convinced that
even if the Dispensability Thesis is true, the Derivativity Thesis must be true as
well. For even if it could be replaced by an equally effective argument, the
justificatory force of a thought experiment might still be based on its capacity
to make available in a theoretical way those tacit practical commitments that
enable us to negotiate the physical world.

4. Conclusion

In this essay, I have offered reasons for thinking that a certain view about
thought experiments in science is false. The view is that any scientific thought
experiment can be reconstructed as a non-thought-experimental argument
without loss of demonstrative force. In part 1, I explained the philosophical
motivations for adopting such a view, and distinguished two versions of the
position. The first—the Dispensability Thesis—concerns the replaceability of
thought experiments; the second—the Derivativity Thesis—concerns their justificatory force. In the remainder of the essay, I offered reasons for thinking that
both of these theses are false. Through a detailed discussion of a thought
experiment of Galileo’s, I tried to show that the standard argumentative reconstruction of the case fails to capture its justificatory power, and I suggested
reasons to think that any other argumentative reconstruction would be likely
to fail in similar ways. I then argued that even if one were to provide an
argumentative reconstruction that did almost perfectly capture the thought
experiment’s demonstrative force, this would not show that the reason the
thought experiment is successful is because, deep down, it is nothing more
than an argument in disguise. I suggested that, to the contrary, the success

  29
     [31] For one such (evolutionarily based) attempt, cf. Shepard 1994; a similar explanation is
offered in Sorensen 1992a.

=== p. 41 ===

of the thought experiment may be a result of the way in which it invites
the reader’s constructive participation, depicts particulars in ways that make
manifest practical knowledge, and describes an imaginary scenario wherein
relevant features can be separated from those that are inessential to the question at issue.30

  30
     [*] Acknowledgements: For comments on previous drafts of this essay, a predecessor of
which appeared as a chapter of my 1996 dissertation, I am grateful to Richard Boyd, James
Robert Brown, Michael Glanzberg, Steven Gross, Ned Hall, Norman Kretzmann, Thomas Kuhn,
John Murdoch, John Norton, Robert Nozick, Derek Parfit, Hilary Putnam, W. V. Quine, Sherri
Roush, Simon Saunders, Roger Shepard, Alison Simmons, Zoltán Gendler Szabó, and audiences
at Harvard (1995) and Cornell (1996) Universities.

