=== chunk: gendler-2010-intuition-imagination-philosophical-methodology/ch5-fake-barns ===
title: The Real Guide to Fake Barns: A Catalogue (with Hawthorne)
source_pdf: docs/sources/gendler-2010-intuition-imagination-philosophical-methodology/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 109-126
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 98
plan_page_end: 115
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 98 ===

      The Real Guide to Fake Barns:
      A Catalogue of Gifts for
      Your Epistemic Enemies

According to Wikipedia

Show, don’t tell is an admonition to fiction writers to write in a manner that allows the
reader to experience the story through a character’s action, words, thoughts, senses, and
feelings rather than through the narrator’s exposition, summarization, and description.

In this chapter, we attempt to show (as opposed to tell) the reader that a particular
intuition that has played a central role in discussions of epistemology for roughly a
quarter century is highly unstable. The larger lesson is a self-referential one: if the essay
succeeds, this shows (in the relevant sense) the value of its own methodology.
   As will quickly become clear, the discussion presupposes the reader’s familiarity with a
particular literature in Anglo-American epistemology. Those who find themselves disoriented might begin by reading Alvin Goldman’s widely reprinted article “Discrimination
and Perceptual Knowledge” (1976), in which the original “fake barn” case is presented,
and then glance through the responses to it that can be found in any of the standard late
twentieth-century epistemology anthologies.1
   Alternatively, those perplexed by the essay’s jokes (including this one) might try
consulting “The Real Guide to ‘The Real Guide to Fake Barns’,” publication information
for which can be found in “The Real Guide to Real Guides” (Meinong Press).

                                            ***
This essay was co-authored with John Hawthorne and was first published in Philosophical
Studies, 124 (2005), 331–52. It is reprinted with the kind permission of Springer’s Science
and Business Media. The text that appears here is unchanged except for a few small
stylistic alterations and typographical corrections, the incorporation of bibliographical
footnotes into the main text, and the relocation and reconfiguration of a couple of
contentful footnotes. As a result, several footnote numbers have changed; the original
number of each footnote is noted in [square brackets].

  1
    [Note added in 2009: Two particularly comprehensive volumes are Sosa and Kim 2000 and
Bernecker and Dretske 2000.]

=== p. 99 ===

Recently, we have come across a top-secret document from the Council of
Intuition Adjudicators (CIA). The document reports a series of troubling developments, all stemming from efforts to exploit patented knowledge-prevention
technology developed at the University of Michigan in the mid-1970s (Goldman 1976). Whereas traditional efforts in this area had focused on preventing
knowledge by preventing belief—and hence had fallen afoul of Federal Belief
Intervention (FBI) guidelines—this new generation of products is in full conformity with FBI regulations; just as neutron bombs kill while leaving buildings
intact, these products prevent knowledge without affecting beliefs.
  Early reports suggested that the dangers of such weapons could be safely
contained: Intuitions concerning their effects seemed relatively stable, and
principled articulations of the circumstances under which they were effective
seemed possible. But the recently discovered CIA document confirms the growing suspicion of many that such ease of containment was merely an illusion.
Rather, it seems, to stop the deployment of such weapons we need to make
appeal to some of the most dreaded resources in the CIA arsenal: challenging
the reliability of certain widely held intuitions about particular cases, or perhaps
even challenging the systematicity of intuitions in this realm as a whole.
  Below, we reproduce the CIA document in full.

To: Council of Intuition Adjudicators (CIA) Epistemic Agents
From: Agent 11.18.1976
As all of you know, for many years we have been coming across various shady
catalogues offering a wide range of products designed to prevent knowledge
without preventing belief. But few of us had taken seriously the threat that they
seem to pose. Recently, however, we have undertaken a systematic exploration
of these documents—and have come to a rather pessimistic conclusion: rather
than following along principled lines, intuitions about these cases seem wildly
unstable and case-dependent.
   Below, we reproduce a number of original documents revealing this unsettling history.

1. Background

Until quite recently, most catalogues offered only products such as the following:
Exhibit One: Cardboard Building Advertisement from Let’s Get Real (a catalogue
directed at real estate agents seeking to prevent competitors from knowing about
various buildings in their neighborhoods). (Case codename “ORIGINAL BARN”)
  Since their introduction in 1976, our cardboard buildings have set the
  “Goldman standard” for facsimile edifices. Widely lauded by philosophers
  around the world as highly effective knowledge-preventers, our patented
  constructions are perceptually indistinguishable from their

=== p. 100 ===

  actual-building counterparts, and are available in a wide range of
  styles, including the garden-variety “Ann’s arbor,” the widely
  popularized “Arizona adobe” and—our latest—“Nouveau Brunswick.”
    Easily installed with tools available in any epistemologist’s home,
  these facsimiles need only to be arranged in such a way that when
  someone approaches the target building, there will be a large number
  of replicas in the area. If the subject’s eyes happen to fall on the real
  house (barn, etc.), they will form the belief that it is a house (barn,
  etc.)—but they won’t know it!
    All of our facsimile buildings have been subjected to the most
  rigorous thought-experimental testing, and meet or exceed industry
  standards for knowledge-prevention.

   Just to remind Agents of how this technology works, we ask them to recall the
widely circulated 1976 document produced by Secret Agent Goldman, who had
just been assigned to the CIA’s nascent pro-discrimination beat. Goldman
describes an unclassified interaction between an Agent and his son, in which
the Agent—code-named “Henry”—is identifying “various objects on the landscape as they come into view. ‘That’s a cow,’ says Henry, ‘that’s a tractor,’ ‘that’s
a silo,’ ‘that’s a barn.’” Agent Goldman continues: “Henry has no doubt about
the identity of these objects: in particular, he has no doubt that the last-mentioned object is a barn, which indeed it is. Each of the identified objects
has features characteristic of its type. Moreover, each object is fully in view.
Henry has excellent eyesight, and he has enough time to look at them reasonably carefully, since there is little traffic to distract him.” Secret Agent Goldman
reports that “most of us would have little hesitation in saying . . . that Henry
knows that the object is a barn” (“so long as,” he adds, “we were not in a certain
philosophical frame of mind”).
   But, he points out, this inclination can be sharply contrasted with “the
inclination we would have if we were given some additional information. . . .
Suppose,” Agent Goldman continues, that “we are told that, unknown to
Henry, the district he has just entered is full of papier-mâché facsimiles of
barns . . . [that] look from the road exactly like barns, but are really just
facades . . . quite incapable of being used as barns . . . [ but] so cleverly constructed that travelers invariably mistake them for barns.” Under such circumstances, Goldman reports, we would be strongly inclined to withdraw the claim
that Henry knows the object is a barn. (Goldman 1976: 772–3).2

  2
     [3] The technique of preventing belief by distracting the observer with a large number of
facsimiles can, of course, be found much earlier—for instance, in the Irish folktale “Farmer Tom
and the Leprechaun.” In that story, Tom meets a Leprechaun who eventually agrees to show
him a gorse bush beneath which a treasure lies hidden. Poor Tom has no tool with him to use
for digging, but he has a shovel back at home. Before setting off to retrieve the shovel, he
carefully ties a red garter around the designated bush, and extracts from the Leprechaun a
promise that the garter will not be removed. The Leprechaun keeps his promise. But . . . when

=== p. 101 ===

   Most Agents accepted the thrust of Goldman’s original diagnosis, viz: “S has
perceptual knowledge if and only if not only does his perceptual mechanism
produce true belief, but there are no relevant counterfactual situations in which
the same belief would be produced via an equivalent percept and in which the
belief would be false” (Goldman 1976: 786)—although it had long been clear
that some modifications were required concerning the notion of “same belief.”
For what does it mean to say that the belief Henry expresses by “that’s a barn”
(Goldman 1976: 772 and passim) could (in a relevant counterfactual situation)
have been false? Presumably, it’s not that that very barn could, in a relevant
counterfactual situation, have failed to be a barn, or that that very belief could
have, in a relevant counterfactual situation, involved a different (perhaps merely apparent) barn.3 Rather, the idea seems to be that there is a relevant counterfactual situation in which a sufficiently similar belief would have been false. It
was widely agreed that all of this required no more than a charitable reading or,
at most, a friendly amendment.
   However, more intractable issues rapidly came to light. As with any technology, there was the danger that Goldman’s innovation would fall into the hands
of those who did not fully understand its mechanisms. And this is precisely
what began to happen. But the process of adjudicating intuitions in response to
these cases proved much more difficult than anyone had ever expected.

2. Your Friends Will Never Know

The first document to reach CIA hands was associated with the obviously
outrageous “Your Friends Will Never Know You’re Wearing a Diamond Ring”
campaign.
Exhibit Two: Costume jewelry advertisement from Treasures to Trinkets: Merchandise for the Modest. (Case codename: “FRIENDS NEVER KNOW”)

  Recently introduced in our widely publicized “Your Friends Will Never
  Know You’re Wearing a Diamond Ring” campaign, our costume jewelry
  collection offers you a way of preventing others from knowing that
  you are sporting some sort of valuable doo-dah. Just send us a
  photograph of your genuine gem, and we’ll do the rest!

Tom comes back, every gorse bush within sight has been adorned with an identical red garter,
and poor Tom returns home no richer than when he set out. (The theme is also explored—with
a nice Dutch Book twist—in Dr. Seuss’s fable The Sneetches.) A more serious employment of this
technique is the (perhaps apocryphal story of the) Danish population’s decision during World
War II to wear, en masse, the yellow star intended by Nazis as an identifying mark for Jews. All
are vivid illustrations of the fact that we may well care about “if” only if “only if.”
  3
     [4] One might try to finesse the problem by appealing to a notion of “same belief” where,
for demonstrative ingredients, the sameness in question concerns something like (Kaplanian)
character rather than (Kaplanian) content.

=== p. 102 ===

    Our Diamond Ring Kit provides you with six phony diamond rings that
  look identical to your genuine rock. Slip them surreptitiously into
  your pocket, and whenever someone sees your ring, there will be lots of
  fakes in the area. Result? Even when their eyes chance upon it, your
  friends will not know you’re wearing a diamond ring!

   There was no doubt among our Agents that this kit did not work, and it took
only a few minutes for them to articulate why.4 In order to prevent an observer
from knowing (of the actual ring) that “that’s a diamond ring,” it is not
sufficient that there be facsimile diamond rings in the area; the facsimile rings
need to be such that the observer is at serious risk of noticing them.5
   But what sort of risk was at issue? Agents began considering cases like the
following. Suppose that Always has only one ring—an authentic diamond that
she never takes off—and suppose she walks around the mall surrounded by a
phalanx of constant-fake-ring-wearers. When the casual observer’s gaze falls on
Always, does he know that she is wearing a diamond ring? Most Agents agreed that
he does not know: after all, the casual observer’s gaze might easily have fallen on
one of the fake-ring-wearers, producing in him a relevantly similar yet false belief.
And if a phalanx of fake-ring-wearers does the trick, most Agents agreed, so does a
single constant-fake-ring-wearing companion—call her Never. If Always walks
around the Mall with Never, they contended, the casual observer whose gaze
falls upon Always’s finger does not know that Always is wearing a diamond ring.

   4
     [5] It is crucial to remember that here, as throughout, we are interested only in pairs of cases
where (a) knowledge occurs in one case and is prevented in the other, and (b) the believer’s
subjective state is indistinguishable in the two cases: pairs where there is knowledge in the
distracter-free case but where, arguably, there is no knowledge in the relevant-facsimile case,
and where the knower/believer feels no difference in her degree of doubt or uncertainty in the
two cases. Because we are interested in the contrast between our knowledge-attributions in two
sorts of circumstances, we need to discount interference arising from the “certain philosophical
frame of mind” that would lead us to hesitate in saying “that Henry knows that the object is a
barn” (or that my friends know I am wearing a diamond ring) even in the distracter-free cases.
And because it is a presumption of such cases that the observer’s internal state is
indistinguishable in the knowledge and non-knowledge cases (cf. the “Henry has no doubt”
and “unknown to Henry” clauses in Goldman’s original presentation), we need to discount
interference arising from our tendency to ascribe to the observer feelings of doubt about the
veridicality of the perceptual information available.
   This is not to deny that there are interesting epistemic—and practical—issues associated
with cases that do not satisfy these criteria. Fashion magazines often caution that there is no
point buying a genuine Chanel watch if the rest of your outfit is off-the-rack: no one will think
that the timepiece is authentic. Analogously, they point out, if the bulk of your wardrobe is
bona fide upmarket, you can save money here and there by filling in with facsimiles. This is
useful advice. But these cases do not satisfy the constraints articulated above: the reason no
one knows you are wearing a Chanel watch in the fashion blunder case is that no one believes
that you are. Since such cases rely on belief-interference, they fall under FBI and not CIA
jurisdiction.
   5
     [6] The question of what makes a risk “serious” has, of course been of long-standing interest
to the CIA: a subcommittee has been established to explore the issues of danger and risk at play
in this particular context: To what extent do they have epistemic ingredients? To what extent
are they ascriber-dependent? What sort of notion of objective chance is at play?

=== p. 103 ===

As in ORIGINAL BARN, the salient proximity of an indistinguishable facsimile is
sufficient to indict the casual observer’s knowledge. (“FAKE-RING COMPANION”)
  Purveyors of facsimile rings quickly got wind of these CIA discussions, and
several began offering product-lines in which fake-ring-sporting companions
were dispatched to accompany genuine-gem-wearers on their daily outings. But
the staffing costs associated with such strategies tended to be excessive, and the
market soon foundered.
  Then, one summer, rumors of a new sort of technology reached CIA headquarters. Treasures-to-Trinkets had revamped its product-line simply by changing the instructions that accompanied its original kits. Whereas the old kits had
instructed subscribers to slip the fakes surreptitiously into their pockets, the
new kits instructed them to alternate which ring they wore on any given day.
“Even if all the facsimiles are at home in your dresser drawer,” the new kit
advertised, “no one will ever know you are wearing a diamond ring. After all,
on any of the other six days, you would have been wearing one of the fakes.”
(“FAKE-RING COLLECTION”)
  Many Agents were of the opinion that FAKE-RING COLLECTION was as
effective at preventing knowledge as FAKE-RING COMPANION. But with the
new technology came new complications. Suppose someone—call her Sometimes—owns one of these new kits, and follows its instructions religiously. One
day, when she happens to be wearing her genuine diamond, she goes to the
mall with Always. The two walk around together, and both fall under the gaze
of a casual observer. (“ALWAYS WITH SOMETIMES”) If the casual observer
would not know that Sometimes was wearing a diamond ring, then presumably
she would not know that Always was. After all, there might be no intrinsic
difference between the two rings, and minimal differences between their wearers’ fingers, hands, clothes, etc. But if so, then something remarkable was going
on. Could one really prevent a casual observer from knowing that someone is
wearing a diamond ring simply by walking around beside her, wearing a real
diamond, with the habit of wearing fakes on other days?6 Could epistemic
contagion really be so easy?
  Agents quickly realized that they were facing a new kind of potential epidemic,7
and divided into three main groups:

  6
     [7] Remember the caveats offered in n. 4 above.
  7
     [8] Some proposed describing the new epidemic as follows. Whereas the ORIGINAL BARN
and its descendants (FAKE-RING COMPANION and FAKE-RING COLLECTION) introduce the
possibility of what we might call primary infection, ALWAYS WITH SOMETIMES introduces the
possibility of what we might call secondary infection. Whereas primary infection requires that
there be some relevant counterfactual situation in which an equivalent percept produces a false
belief, secondary infection requires only that there be some relevant counterfactual situation in
which an equivalent percept is accompanied by a failure to know. Some Agents found the
distinction between primary and secondary infection to be a useful one; others maintained
that so-called cases of secondary infection were just particularly virulent cases of primary
infection.

=== p. 104 ===

(1)   Some insisted that no matter how similar Always and Sometimes are in
      appearance, the casual observer knows that one but not the other is
      wearing a diamond ring. Even if the rings of Always and Sometimes
      produce qualitatively indistinguishable percepts, even if the rings are
      intrinsic duplicates, still the casual observer would know of the one but
      not the other that it bore a diamond. To many, this purported asymmetry
      seemed implausible, though its defenders remained steadfast.8
(2)   Others defended the view that Sometimes is epistemically infectious,
      maintaining that in ALWAYS WITH SOMETIMES, the casual observer
      does not know that either one is wearing a diamond ring. But their
      opponents worried that this would open the floodgates to excessively
      skeptical results. Suppose Never (who wears her fake ring daily) goes to
      the mall almost every day and sits on the bench in front of the central
      fountain at noon. Once a week, however, she stays home to mow the lawn.
      One day, Always goes to the mall and sits on the bench in front of the
      central fountain at noon. It happens to be the day that Never is at home.
      The casual observer’s gaze falls upon Always’ ring. Does he know that she is
      wearing a diamond? (“NEVER AT NOON”)

      Intuition suggests that he does, but the advocate of position (2) faces some
      pressure to say otherwise. After all, the defender of (2) has committed
      himself to saying that when Always walks around with Sometimes-in-hergenuine-ring, the casual observer does not know that either of them is
      wearing a diamond. Why should the fake rings in Sometimes’ drawer indict
      the casual observer’s knowledge in ALWAYS WITH SOMETIMES, but the
      fake ring on Never’s finger not indict his knowledge in NEVER AT NOON?
(3)   A final group maintained that in FAKE-RING COLLECTION, one does know
      that the ring-wearer sports a diamond ring and, correlatively, that in ALWAYS
      WITH SOMETIMES, one knows that both are wearing diamond rings. They
      held that Sometimes’ habit of wearing fake rings does not introduce—even in
      her own case—a relevant counterfactual situation in which an equivalent
      percept produces a false belief; in order for the potential defeaters to be strong
      enough to defeat knowledge, they maintained, the defeaters must, in
      general, be spatially proximate—and not merely temporally so.9

  8
     [9] One Agent offered the following suggestive analogy on their behalf. Consider a series of
pairwise-indistinguishable color chips whose colors shift gradually from red to orange. Oscar
starts on the left, examining the chips one pair at a time. Assume that Oscar knows of the leftmost chip that it is red, but that there is some red chip further down the line that he does not
know is red (say, because he would easily confuse it with a chip that is, in fact, orange). If so,
then at some point during his process of pairwise comparison, he knows that the chip on the
left is red, but does not know that the chip on the right is—even though the percepts are
indiscriminable, and both chips are red.
   9
     [10] If temporal proximity were sufficient, they pointed out, then it would seem that we
know anything at all only due to the absence of hyper-lucid dreams.

=== p. 105 ===

Advocates of (3) differed on what might explain this asymmetry. Some subscribed to a version of what they called the GAZE PRINCIPLE. According to that
principle, candidate-defeaters are relevant in cases where we leave the world as
it is (altering only the observer’s perceptual orientation within it) and irrelevant
in cases where we leave the observer’s perceptual orientation as it is (altering
only features of the world around her). In the first sort of case, one might say,
the defeaters are there, but the observer’s gaze happens not to fall upon them; in
the second sort of case, her gaze is there, but the defeaters on which it might
have fallen happen not to be around.10 (Opponents objected that the principle
was ad hoc, contending that there are plenty of cases where non-present but
eminently possible fakes clearly do seem to destroy knowledge.)
   Others subscribed to a version of what they called the LIVE-DANGER PRINCIPLE: cases where candidate-defeaters are relevant are cases where there is, on
that occasion, a real danger of mistake; cases where candidate-defeaters are
irrelevant are cases where there is, on that occasion, no real danger of a mistake.
Suppose that Never could easily have shown up at that mall but that morning
chose not to. At noon, I approach the fountain. Intuitively, there is on that
occasion no danger of my observing Never and forming a false diamond belief.
(This comports with general intuitions about the absence or presence of danger.
If someone considers planting a bomb but has chosen not to, then I am not,
later that day, in danger of being blown up.) Similarly, the story goes, when I
approach Sometimes on her real ring day, there is on that occasion no danger of
my gaze coming to fasten onto a fake ring. (Opponents objected that this was ad
hoc. If I am driving by a real barn and the fakes are a few hundred yards away,
then isn’t there some sense in which there is at that moment no danger of my
gaze falling on a fake? It seemed quite unclear how to calibrate live danger so
that lines are drawn where intuition suggests they ought to fall.11)

3. The Contingencies of Risk

A call on the Citizens’ Hotline alerted the CIA to an additional complicating
factor that revealed diamond ring cases to have barely scratched the surface.

  10
      [11] One Agent suggested that appealing to this principle was like trying to refute Berkeley
by staring at a stone.
  11
      [11] Cf. Agent Goldman’s original report: “How shall we specify alternative states of affairs
that are candidates for being [relevant alternatives]? . . . [Clearly,] the object in the alternative
state of affairs need not be identical with the actual object . . . [and some] alternative states of
affairs [may] involve the same object but different properties . . . Sometimes, indeed, we may
wish to allow non-actual possible objects. Otherwise the framework will be unable in principle
to accommodate some of the skeptic’s favorite alternatives, e.g. those involving demons”
(Goldman 1976: 780). . . . “An adequate account of the term ‘know’ should make the
temptations of skepticism comprehensible” (Goldman 1976: 790).

=== p. 106 ===

Exhibit Three: Hotline recording (Case codename: “FAKE BAR”)

  Unbeknownst to its patrons, Awful Alvin’s Bar serves genuine gin six
  days per week—and an undetectable surrogate on Sundays. Tom goes out
  nearly every night; Dick drinks only after his seminar on Tuesdays;
  Harry is unpredictable but always spends Sundays at home with his
  family. The three of them gather at Awful Alvin’s on Tuesday night,
  and each of them orders a gin and tonic. Oscar walks in and asks each
  one what he is drinking. “That’s gin,” each replies. Does Tom know that
  he’s drinking gin? Does Dick? Does Harry? And does Oscar know that each
  is imbibing authentically?

   FRIENDS NEVER KNOW had taught Agents that mere proximity of a fake is
not sufficient for the fake’s presence to prevent knowledge: the observer has to
be at risk of noticing it. But what FAKE BAR drew attention to was that the risk
of a fake being noticed by a particular observer may depend on highly contingent features of the observer, differences that do not, intuitively, make for a
difference in his capacity to know the subject matter at hand. While his
commitment to family time on Sunday may be laudable, it is odd to suppose
that it has the additional benefit of enabling Harry, though not Tom, to know
that a genuine gin is being poured on some Tuesday evening (given that both
have the same perceptual exposure to the gin, and both have very similar
discriminatory capacities).
   Once the problem had been exposed, it was easy enough to find more
illustrations. For example: While Ed walks past a real barn, Fred drives by and
briefly stops his car. There are fake barns within easy driving distance—indeed it
is quite likely that Fred will soon come upon one—though there are no fake
barns accessible by foot. There is thus no real risk of Ed observing a fake barn,
but there is a real risk for Fred. Or again: While Ike is short-sighted, Mike has
excellent vision. There are fake barns in the area, perched on hilltops that can
be observed by someone with acute eyesight. There is thus no real risk of Ike
observing a fake barn, but a good chance of Mike doing so. Ed, Fred, Ike, and
Mike observe a real barn at fairly close range. Should we conclude that Ed and
Ike, but not Fred and Mike, know that there is a barn there?
   Some Agents were happy to follow these cases where they seemed to lead,
concluding that the knowledge-preventing capacity of fakes depends on the
risk they induce of a subject’s perceiving them. The walker knows; the driver
doesn’t. The short-sighted observer knows; the observer with 20–20 vision
doesn’t. Others balked. It is intolerable, they argued, to allow that slow speed
and short-sightedness could yield such epistemic dividends. Perceptual risk,
they maintained, is highly observer-sensitive—in ways that knowledge is
not—so the two cannot go hand-in-hand.
   A CIA subcommittee has been assigned to investigate this matter further.

=== p. 107 ===

4. Retention and Prevention

Meanwhile, additional documents gave rise to further complications.
Exhibit Four: Travel brochure for Unpotemkin-on-Lethe: The Village Vacation She’ll
Never Remember (Case codename: DAYTIME VOYAGE)
  Want to send your Boss on an un-rememberable vacation? Try Unpotemkin:
  a floating village that wends its way up and down the Lethe River. Home to
  some of the loveliest barns in the world, Unpotemkin is certain to
  entrance your Boss with its architectural splendors.
     Here is the sort of exciting postcard you can expect your Boss to
  write: “From my comfortable seat at the center of Unpotemkin village,
  I have a lovely view of the farm that lies at its northern tip. Even
  though I just arrived this morning, here are some things I already
  know: That’s a tractor. That’s a silo. That’s a barn.”
     Later that afternoon, we will unmoor the village, and send it floating
  gently downstream. As Unpotemkin glides down the Lethe, it will pass
  through fake barn country, where the river’s banks are strewn with
  high-quality Goldman-standard barn facsimiles. What an exciting
  moment! Your Boss can’t write another bragging postcard! For she no
  longer knows that Unpotemkin sports a barn! (After all, her gaze might
  well have just fallen upon one of the many fakes.)
     Don’t forget to tell all your office-mates about Unpotemkin-onLethe: the vacation you can’t remember!

   CIA Agents were quick to challenge the ad’s claims. Most agreed that knowledge was not lost in the way the ad suggested. (Those who demurred tended to
be the ones who had secretly purchased fake diamonds to hide in their ex-wives’ dressers . . .)
   Many Agents thought the key issue was the relevance of collateral information about the past. Suppose we agree that in the morning, prior to entering
fake barn country, Boss knows that there is a barn at the end of Unpotemkin
Village. Even if we grant that fake barns in the area in the afternoon would
prevent a first-time onlooker from acquiring knowledge, it is hard to see that
fake barns would interfere with Boss’s ability to retain her knowledge that a
barn was there in the morning. Consider the barn located at location L. Assume
that Boss knows in the afternoon that there was a barn at L in the morning, and
assume further that Boss can reidentify location L. (The presence of fake barns
on the bank in the afternoon would surely not impede such reidentification.)
Then, insofar as Boss can know in the afternoon that, upon looking at location
L, she is looking at the same object that she saw in the morning, it would seem
that she can know in the afternoon that she is looking at a barn. Since the
presence of fake barns on the shore would not seem to make any trouble for the
reliability of beliefs of the form “that is the same object I saw yesterday,” it
would seem that Boss has, after all, the basis for knowing that there is a barn in

=== p. 108 ===

front of her in location L, even when the banks are replete with fakes. The
mistake is to suppose that when she looks at an Unpotemkin barn during the
passage through fake barn country, the basis of her belief is merely the visual
percept that the barn generates.12
  Not all Agents were satisfied. Suppose Holly sits down on a bench in front of a
barn in the morning when there are no fakes in the area and forms the belief
“that’s a barn.” Just before noon, several fake barns are erected just out of view.
Later that afternoon, Molly arrives on the scene and joins Holly on the bench
where she has been sitting all day. Molly looks at the real barn and forms the
belief “that’s a barn.” According to the analysis just presented, Holly but not
Molly would know that she is looking at a barn—even though the two are
seated side-by-side on the same bench, each having seen only a real barn, and
each confronting the same risk of observing the newly constructed fakes that lie
just beyond their range of sight. This, maintained the dissenters, is intuitively
intolerable. The dispute remains unresolved.

5. The Price of Caution

For many years, cases confronted by the CIA were primarily concerned—like
those above—with issues surrounding the notion of what makes a counterfactual situation relevant. Few had exploited the second main element in Gold-man’s original diagnosis—that of “equivalent percept.”13 But then the CIA
began to come across documents like the following.
Exhibit Five: Travel brochure for The Veldt Belt: A Place to Laugh about Animal
Knowledge (ANIMAL SAFARI)

  Does your wise old Uncle Milton want to get back at his epistemically
  cautious cousin Isidore? Send them on one of our Veldt Belt
  excursions . . . So long as Isidore is reluctant to make judgments about

  12
     [12] How does all this bear on Goldman’s original dictum that “S has perceptual
knowledge if and only if not only does his perceptual mechanism produce true belief, but
there are no relevant counterfactual situations in which the same belief would be produced via
an equivalent percept and in which the belief would be false” (Goldman 1976: 786)? For isn’t
this a case where we have knowledge that is arguably perceptual—despite the fact that an
equivalent percept produces a false belief in various nearby counterfactual situations? Some
Agents insisted that owing to the import of collateral information, it is not true in this case that
the perceptual mechanism produces the belief (in the relevant sense of “produce”). Others
suggested that some of the surroundings (in this case, those used to reidentify L) may here be
considered crucial to the percept, in which case the counterfactual perceptions of fake barns
would not generate equivalent percepts in the relevant sense.
  13
     [13] “S has perceptual knowledge if and only if not only does his perceptual mechanism
produce true belief, but there are no relevant counterfactual situations in which the same belief
would be produced via an equivalent percept and in which the belief would be false” (Goldman
1976: 786).

=== p. 109 ===

  the species to which a particular animal belongs while Milton is not,
  then Milton will know that he is seeing animals, while Isidore won’t
  know he’s seeing animals!
    Even if Milton and Isidore never disagree about whether something is
  an animal—even if there is no nomically possible perceptual situation
  in which the two of them deliver different verdicts on whether an
  object presented is an animal—still, Milton will know that he is
  seeing animals, and Isidore will not know that he is seeing animals.
  Ha ha ha—the joke’s on Izzie!
    How does this fantastic safari work? Let me tell you how. In
  anticipation of Milton’s visit, we will populate the veldt with
  numerous fake antelopes—and three real tigers. And then we will send
  Milton and Izzie out in one of our Jurassic jeeps . . .
    Milton will look at one of the tigers, form the belief that it is a
  tiger, come to know that it is a tiger, and thereby come to know that he
  has seen an animal. But what about Milton’s cautious cousin Izzie? He
  will look at one of the tigers, be reluctant to form the belief that it
  is a tiger, and instead merely form the belief that it is an animal. But
  now we’ve got him! The area is rife with fake animals—artificial
  antelopes on every apex! So Izzie will not know that he is seeing an
  animal—but Milton will . . . Foolish old Izzie: he has paid the price of
  caution!

   Agents condemned the case immediately, quickly pointing out its similarity
to Agent Goldman’s dachshund/wolf example. Suppose, proposed Goldman,
that Oscar has a tendency to mistake wolves for dogs, and that he observes a
dachshund in a field frequented by canis lupus. Seeing the dachshund, Oscar
believes a dog to be present. (“DACHSHUND WOLF”) Does he know that a dog
is present? After all, he would (falsely) believe a dog to be present even if he were
merely to have seen one of the many wandering wolves. Goldman rejects this
reasoning as follows:
If Oscar believes that a dog is present because of a certain way he is “appeared to,” then
this true belief fails to be knowledge if there is an alternative situation in which a non-dog
produces the same belief by means of the same, or a very similar, appearance. But the wolf
situation is not such an alternative. . . . An alternative that disqualifies a true perceptual
belief from being perceptual knowledge must be a “perceptual equivalent” of the actual
state of affairs. (Goldman 1976: 779)

He goes on to produce a refined account of the notion of “perceptual equivalence”:
If the percept produced by the alternative state of affairs would not differ from the actual
percept in any respect that is causally relevant to S’s belief, this alternative situation is a
perceptual equivalent for S of the actual situation. . . . Consider now the dachshund-wolf
case. The hypothetical percept produced by a wolf would differ from Oscar’s actual
percept of the dachshund in respects that are causally relevant to Oscar’s judgment that

=== p. 110 ===

a dog is present. Let me elaborate. There are various kinds of objects, rather different in
shape, size, color, and texture, that would be classified by Oscar as a dog. He has a number
of visual “schemata”, we might say, each with a distinctive set of features, such that any
percept that “matches” or “fits” one of these schemata would elicit a “dog” classification
. . . Now although a dachshund and a wolf would each produce a dog-belief in Oscar, the
percepts produced by these respective stimuli would differ in respects that are causally
relevant to Oscar’s forming a dog-belief. Since Oscar’s dachshund schema includes such
features as having an elongated, sausage-like shape, a smallish size, and droopy ears, these
features of the percept are all causally relevant, when a dachshund is present, to Oscar’s
believing that a dog is present. (Goldman 1976: 782–3)

Most Agents agreed that analogous reasoning could be used to account for the
intuition that Isidore knows he is seeing animals: presumably, the cautious
cousin uses a variety of “visual templates” to decide whether something is an
animal, and the visual template that triggers an animal belief in the case of a
tiger differs from the one that would have been activated by the fake antelope.
It is for this reason that we are inclined to dismiss the fake antelopes in ANIMAL
SAFARI as irrelevant to Isidore’s knowledge—even though he does not have the
conceptual confidence to distinguish them by name. Caution does not carry
that sort of epistemic cost.
   But if the visual template analysis is correct, Agents pointed out, then if
Isidore’s template is sufficiently permissive, ANIMAL SAFARI could describe a
case where Milton knows that he is seeing animals, whereas Isidore does not. If
one of the schemata that Isidore uses in animal identification is satisfied both
by antelope-shaped creatures and tiger-shaped creatures, then he will pay the
price not of caution, but of indifference.
   Similarly, they continued, suppose Agent Orange is insensitive to certain
subtleties of shading, whereas Colonel Mustard is not; there will be cases
where Colonel Mustard will know that he is seeing a red piece of paper, whereas
Agent Orange will not—even though Mustard and Orange never disagree
about whether a sheet of paper is red and thus neither is more easily deceived
(or more reliable) in redness verdicts than the other. Suppose that the two are
sitting side by side. In front of them is a piece of paper of the shade red-36,
surrounded by pieces of white paper that have been illuminated to look as if
they are of the shades red-32, red-34, and red-38. Casting their gazes on the red-36 sheet, Colonel Mustard and Agent Orange both form the judgment: there is
a red piece of paper before me. But if the visual template analysis is correct,
Colonel Mustard knows that there is, whereas Agent Orange does not—even
though it may be nomologically impossible for them ever to disagree in perceptual cases about whether something is red. On this picture, indifference
brings ignorance in its wake: the narrower the range of features that play a
causal role in bringing about a perceptual belief, the wider the range of its
relevant defeaters.

=== p. 111 ===

6. Apples and Oranges: The Search for Consistent Principles

But a dinner party the next week at the home of one of our protagonists
revealed that this could not be the full story.
Exhibit Six: Orange’s Apple
  The Association of Fruit Lovers meets for dinner at Agent Orange’s
  house. In the middle of his dining room table sits a clear glass bowl.
  In the middle of the bowl sits a single real apple. Nestled around it are
  two fake oranges, a fake cantaloupe, three fake peaches, and two fake
  coconuts. (FRUIT BOWL)

Suppose a member of the Association casts her eyes upon the bowl. According
to the Equivalent Percept Articles (EPA), she knows that she is seeing an apple.
After all, she looks at the apple, forms the belief that it is an apple, and
thereby—since there are no fake apples in the area—comes to know that that
is an apple in the bowl before her. And if she knows that there is an apple in the
bowl, presumably she knows that there is a piece of real fruit in the bowl.
   But does she? The intuitions of many Agents suggested otherwise.
   Now there was trouble: for FRUIT BOWL and ANIMAL SAFARI are, Agents
were quick to note, structurally similar. Indeed, the casual visitor in FRUIT
BOWL—who seems clearly not to know that there is a real piece of fruit before
her—is in the position of Uncle Milton—who seemed clearly to know that he
had seen an animal in ANIMAL SAFARI. What could explain the difference?
   One difference seemed immediately striking: the apple in FRUIT BOWL
is surrounded by many different sorts of fake fruit, whereas the tiger in
ANIMAL SAFARI is surrounded by only one sort of fake animal. Place the real
apple in a bowl of fake bananas and surround the real tiger by fake giraffes,
lions, and gazelles, and the intuition-gap begins to fade. But why should
this matter?
   Some Agents reasoned as follows. FRUIT BOWL is presented in such a way
that there are a variety of fake fruits in the bowl: fake oranges, fake peaches, fake
coconuts, and so on. Upon hearing that story, it seems reasonable to think that
whoever placed such a wide assortment of fake fruits in the bowl could easily
have placed fake apples there as well. In ANIMAL SAFARI, by contrast, the
presence of fake antelopes does not in itself raise the specter that fake tigers
could easily have been present too. But change the safari story to one in which
the real tigers are surrounded by fake giraffes, fake lions, fake zebras, and the
like—and the specter looms large. Change the fruit bowl story to one in which
the host has simply placed her apple on top of a pile of fake bananas, and the
gap fades in the opposite direction.
   Other agents were dissatisfied. They pointed out that this diagnosis depends
upon appealing to the relevance of the possibility of a non-present fake
apple producing a percept similar to that produced by the real apple. But,

=== p. 112 ===

they pointed out, if one concedes that this is what prevents knowledge in FRUIT
BOWL, then its analogue ought to prevent knowledge in NEVER AT NOON.
After all, in that case too a fake could easily have been present that produces the
same percept and belief. But only a minority of Agents had conceded that
knowledge was prevented by Never’s counterfactual presence at the fountain.14
  A problem had crystallized: How could one consistently maintain that
knowledge was present in NEVER AT NOON, but absent in FRUIT BOWL?
Some Agents suggested the following. In FRUIT BOWL, the reasonableness of
the belief that there is a real apple depends upon certain false beliefs being
uncorrected: if the observer in FRUIT BOWL were told that his beliefs about
the apparent oranges, peaches, coconuts, etc. were false, he could no longer
reasonably believe that the apple was real. By contrast, the reasonableness of
the belief in NEVER AT NOON does not depend upon certain false beliefs being
uncorrected.
  But, pointed out dissenters, this UNCORRECTED-FALSE-BELIEF PRINCIPLE
runs afoul of the following intuition. Suppose the fruit is arranged in an opaque
bowl, so when the observer enters the room, all he sees is the apple on top. Were
he to take one step further, his gaze would fall upon the fake oranges and
peaches, etc., but from where he stands, all that is visible is the real apple. He
thus has no uncorrected false beliefs about the other fruits. Still, contended
these Agents, there is some inclination to say that he does not know in this case.
After all, they pointed out, suppose that the opaque bowl contained fake apples
instead. In that case we would surely say that he does not know that he is seeing
an apple—by straightforward ORIGINAL BARN reasoning. Given this, it seems
implausible to some to say that he knows he is seeing an apple when he sees
only the single real apple perched atop the bowl of fake fruit. So, they contended, the difference between FRUIT BOWL and NEVER AT NOON cannot be
fully explained by appeal to uncorrected actual false beliefs.
  Agents agreed that it was a matter for further investigation.15

  14
      [14] Or again: suppose someone buys a rose—call it Sharon—which he is determined to
surround with either fake roses or real daisies. He tosses a coin and decides to surround it with
real daisies. Oscar sees the vase and forms the belief of Sharon that it is a rose. But given the setup of the story, there is a close world where a person in Oscar’s situation would form the belief of
various fake flowers in the vase that they were roses. This hardly seems to prevent Oscar from
knowing that a rose is present in the actual world. Or consider a variation on ANIMAL SAFARI
where safari organizers parachute in one real tiger, then flip a coin as to whether to populate the
remainder of the veldt with (a) fake tigers, or (b) real antelopes. Uncle Milton is lucky enough to
go on safari (b)—but he only pays attention to the tiger. Does he know that he has seen an
animal?
  15
      [15] Some suggested that the right way to account for the opaque-bowl cases was by
making appeal to something like the LIVE-DANGER PRINCIPLE in conjunction with the
UNCORRECTED-FALSE-BELIEF PRINCIPLE, withholding knowledge when there is a live
danger of the observer holding false beliefs on whose lack of correction the reasonableness of
the candidate belief lies. Dissenters retorted by pointing out that this would result in
widespread skepticism.

=== p. 113 ===

7. Time Change

Some months after the initial memo appeared, two further cases came to the
attention of the CIA, both further destabilizing the apparent reliability of classic
barn intuitions.
Exhibit Seven: Watch Out
  You enter a room and ask someone the time. She replies truthfully and
  correctly, and she is extremely reliable. But your informant happens to
  be surrounded by a roomful of compulsive liars. Do you know what time it is?

Field studies by the CIA indicate that—with the exception of small pockets in
the vicinity of Tucson—there is a tendency to ascribe knowledge in this case.16
But why should there be any intuitive discrepancy between a case of testimony
with liars in the area and a case of perception with fake barns in the area? Could
the difference depend on the intentions of the distracters? It seems not: for
suppose that instead of being surrounded by compulsive liars, your informant is
surrounded by well-meaning truth-tellers whose watches have stopped. Intuitions remain stably knowledge-supporting, even though the chance of having
gotten misinformation remains high.
   Some agents suggested the following diagnosis, a cousin to the UNCORRECTED-FALSE-BELIEF PRINCIPLE. If I ask someone the time then my inclination to
trust that person will not be—nor ought it to be—significantly affected by the
information that certain other people in the area are liars (or have watches that
have stopped). For the information that certain other people are liars (or have
broken watches) gives me no especially good reason to think that the person I am
talking to is a liar (or has a broken watch).17 My conditional credence that
the person I am talking to is a liar on the information that certain other people
in the area are liars ought not to be significantly higher than my credence that
the person I am talking to is a liar. This is because, in general, the information
that X is a liar does not tell me anything much about whether Y is a liar—and

   16
      [16] Matters may be different when that very individual is disposed to lie about similar
subject matter. Agent Brown suggests the following case. “Sherlock Holmes is trying to
determine the circumstances behind Body’s mysterious death. He knows that Doctor Who,
Lord How and Private Why witnessed the death. What he doesn’t know, because it has never
occurred to him to think about it, is that all three are pathological liars. Doctor Who will always
tell a lie except when asked a ‘Who?’ question, Lord How lies except in answer to a ‘How?’
question and Private Why lies except in answer to a ‘Why?’ question. Holmes knows none of
this, but being struck by a whim of fancy given their names, he decides to ask the Doctor who
killed Body, the Lord how it was done, and Private why it was done. All three answer truthfully,
and Holmes comes to believe them. Does Holmes know the who, how, and why of Body’s
murder?” Here many informants were reluctant to classify any of Sherlock’s testimonially
obtained beliefs as knowledge.
   17
      [17] Insofar as one thinks the information suggests a conspiracy or plague, one will be
correspondingly reluctant to attribute knowledge.

=== p. 114 ===

likewise with the other cases where we are inclined to attribute knowledge. By
contrast, if you tell me that certain other barn-appearing things in the area are
not in fact barns, this will give me at least some reason to think that the barn-appearing thing that I am looking at is not in fact a barn. My conditional
credence that the thing I am looking at is a barn on the information that certain
other barn-looking things in the area are not barns is significantly lower than my
credence that the barn-looking thing I am looking at is a barn—and likewise with
other cases where we are inclined to withhold an attribution of knowledge.
   Other Agents felt that a less abstract diagnosis was called for. They conjectured that our methods of epistemic evaluation for assessing knowledge based
on testimony are likely to be structurally different—and perhaps more lenient—
than our methods for assessing perceptual knowledge: the requirements for
transmitting knowledge differ from the requirements for acquiring it.18 Consider the following case, they suggested. Henry inspects a barn in fake-barn
country and tells me: “that’s a barn.” In fact, Henry has done enough to discern
that it is not a mere barn façade: he has walked around inside, tapped on the
walls, used a metal-detector to locate the nails, and so on. But all Henry tells me
is “that’s a barn.” Throughout the area, Henry’s cousins are looking at barn
façades, and—without performing such inspections—blithely reporting to their
companions “that’s a barn.” Intuitively, I know on the basis of Henry’s testimony that that’s a barn. But if I were told that there were many others in the area
who were falsely believing and reporting that they were seeing barns, then my
conviction that Henry is seeing a real barn would no longer be reasonable. This
appears to make trouble for the more abstract diagnosis. Further research
seemed to be called for.

8. Ignorance and Experience

Deep in CIA archives, one final document was found.
Exhibit Eight: The Ignorance Machine

  Employing factive-stative technological innovations developed in
  clandestine laboratories in Oxford and New York,19 we have discovered
  how to prevent individuals from being pleased that p. Here is the new
  top-secret product.
    As the curfew tolls the knell of parting day, your epistemic enemy
  sets off down the garden path to (what he fails to realize is) fake tiger

  18
     [18] Agent Causation points out the following important asymmetry: “Imputations of
lying are insulting in ways that considerations of barn props are not. Thus we feel pragmatic
pressure not to entertain possibilities of lying when we need not, which has no analogue in the
barns case.”
  19
     [19] Cf. Williamson 2000, ch. 1, drawing on ideas put forth in Unger 1975.

=== p. 115 ===

  country. Upon arrival, he is fortunate enough to cast his gaze upon one
  of the few real tigers, burning brightly in the distance. “I am pleased
  that there is a tiger in the area,” he remarks.
    But, of course, he is not! For it turns out that ‘is pleased that p’
  entails ‘knows that p’ (as do other factive predicates that describe
  emotional states). Since your enemy doesn’t know that he is seeing a
  tiger, he isn’t pleased that he’s seeing a tiger—even though, as
  matter of fact, he is seeing a tiger! What poetic justice!

  Many Agents immediately condemned this product as illegitimate. Two
possible diagnoses: (a) despite the impressive array of considerations in its
favor, the fashionable view concerning factive mental predicates is incorrect;
(b) the concept of knowledge, prior to its being fashioned and molded by
certain philosophical traditions, never offered any stable negative verdict in
the original fake barn case.20
  The CIA hereby requests a grant of $10 million to examine these possibilities
in greater detail.21

  20
      [20] An alternative explanation, here and elsewhere, is that the variations in response are
due to the context-dependency of “know.” Though many stylish Agents have embraced this
mode of explanation, conservatives have resisted. Those adopting this kind of strategy face the
additional task of specifying which of the disputes described above represent cases of genuine
disagreement among Agents, and which represent cases where Agents are merely talking past
one another.
  21
      [unnumbered ] Acknowledgements: For comments and encouragement, we are grateful to
Stewart Cohen and Alvin Goldman. Special thanks are due to Agent Brown (Brian Weatherson)
[note added in 2009: when this article was written Weatherson taught at Brown University] and
Agent Causation ( Jonathan Schaffer) for careful comments on an earlier draft of this memo.

