=== chunk: gendler-2010-intuition-imagination-philosophical-methodology/ch6-cognitive-equilibrium ===
title: Philosophical Thought Experiments, Intuitions, and Cognitive Equilibrium
source_pdf: docs/sources/gendler-2010-intuition-imagination-philosophical-methodology/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 127-143
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 116
plan_page_end: 134
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 116 ===

      Philosophical Thought Experiments,
      Intuitions, and Cognitive Equilibrium

It is well known that contemplation of an imaginary particular may have cognitive and
motivational effects different from those evoked by an abstract description of the same
content. This essay explores some of the philosophical implications of this commonplace.
In particular, it looks at the extent to which the effectiveness of thought experiments is
due to the engagement of cognitive mechanisms associated with vivid imagining.
   The essay makes three main claims. First, that by presenting content in a suitably concrete
or abstract way, thought experiments recruit representational schemas that were otherwise
inactive, thereby evoking responses that may run counter to those evoked by alternative
presentations of relevantly similar content. Second, that exactly because they recruit heretofore uninvolved processing mechanisms, thought experiments can be expected to produce
responses to the target material that remain in disequilibrium with responses to the same
material under alternative presentations, so that a true sense of cognitive equilibrium will,
in many cases, prove elusive. And finally, that when thought experiments succeed as devices
of persuasion, it is because the evoked response becomes dominant, so that the subject
comes (either reflectively or unreflectively) to represent relevant non-thought-experimental
content in light of the thought-experimental conclusion.
   This essay—which is more expository and less tightly argued than most of the others in
this volume—is best read in conjunction with two successor papers: “Alief and Belief”
(2008a; Ch. 13) and “Alief in Action (and Reaction)” (2008b; Ch. 14). For those who lack
the time to read all three, it might be useful to know that the two later essays offer a more
sophisticated and nuanced account of the central insight underlying this one, although
they do not address the issue of philosophical thought experiments so directly.

                                             ***
This essay was first published in Midwest Studies in Philosophy: Philosophy and the Empirical,
31 (2007), 68–89 and is reprinted with the kind permission of Wiley-Blackwell. The text
that appears here has been shortened considerably: several extended quotations that
appeared in the original version have been omitted, and superfluous passages have been
eliminated throughout. In addition, a number of references have been updated or added.
As a result of reformatting, several footnote numbers have changed. The original number
of each footnote is noted in [square brackets].

=== p. 117 ===

1. Introduction

It is a commonplace that contemplation of an imaginary particular may have
cognitive and motivational effects that differ from those evoked by an abstract
description of an otherwise similar state of affairs.1 In his Treatise on Human
Nature, Hume (1739/1978) writes forcefully of this. He speaks of “a noted
passage in the history of Greece” where Themistocles tells the Athenians that
he is prepared to carry out a military action that will benefit them enormously,
but whose details must remain secret for the plan to be effective. The Athenians
ask Themistocles to describe his plan to the highly trusted Aristedes, who will
report back to the assembled citizens about its advisability.
   After learning of the plan—which was to set fire to the assembled fleets of all
their enemies—Aristedes reports to the Athenians “that nothing cou’d be more
advantageous than the design of Themistocles but at the same time that nothing cou’d be more unjust.” The response of the Athenians is to reject the project
unanimously (Treatise II. iii. 6. 3).
   Hume reports that this anecdote produced great consternation among some
of his contemporaries, including French historian Charles Rollin, who expressed astonishment that the Athenians would reject such an advantageous
strategy merely because it was unjust. But Hume is unimpressed. He writes:

For my part I see nothing so extraordinary in this proceeding of the Athenians. . . . [T]ho’
in the present case the advantage was immediate to the Athenians, yet as it was known
only under the general notion of advantage, without being conceiv’d by any particular
idea, it must have had a less considerable influence on their imaginations, and have been
a less violent temptation, than if they had been acquainted with all its circumstances:
Otherwise ’tis difficult to conceive, that a whole people, unjust and violent as men
commonly are, shou’d so unanimously have adher’d to justice, and rejected any considerable advantage. (Treatise II. iii. 6. 4)

Hume’s diagnosis has a straightforward corollary. When two options are presented abstractly, the choice made between them may go one way; presented
under some “particular idea” that “influence[s]” the “imagination,” the choice
made between them may go the other. Engagement of the cognitive mechanisms associated with vivid imagining may lead a subject to reverse a prior
commitment, selecting as preferable the option previously rejected, and shunning the option previously embraced.
  Many philosophical thought experiments, I will suggest, exploit exactly the
discrepancy that led to Rollin’s perplexity and Hume’s insight. In the remainder
of this essay, I will explore three corollaries of this central suggestion. First, that

  1
    [Note added in 2009: In the original version of this essay, an extended quotation from Hume
appears at this point. The full quotation can be found in this volume in }4 of “Alief and Belief”
(Ch. 13 p. 280).]

=== p. 118 ===

by presenting content in a suitably concrete or abstract way, these thought
experiments recruit representational schemas that were otherwise inactive,
thereby evoking responses that may run counter to those evoked by alternative
presentations of relevantly similar content. Second, that exactly because they
recruit heretofore uninvolved processing mechanisms, such thought experiments can be expected to produce responses to the target material that remain
in disequilibrium with responses to the same material under alternative presentations, so that a true sense of cognitive equilibrium will, in many cases,
prove elusive. And finally, that when these thought experiments succeed as
devices of persuasion, it is because the evoked response becomes dominant, so
that the subject comes (either reflectively or unreflectively) to represent relevant non-thought-experimental content in light of the thought-experimental
conclusion. In each case, I will present some recent results from psychology and
related disciplines that support the interpretation I am advancing.

2. Cognitive Underpinnings

Nearly a century of empirical investigation has confirmed the extent to which
tasks with the same formal structure but different contents may prompt different rates of success, presumably because the alternative framings activate different processing mechanisms. These cases provide a useful foil to the
philosophical examples to be discussed in the remainder of the essay, since it
is straightforward to isolate their formal from their contentful properties, and
straightforward to ascertain what a correct response amounts to. In this section,
I will review some of the literature that has been taken by psychologists to
establish this claim decisively. The survey is intended to be suggestive, not
comprehensive, and for those even moderately familiar with the literature,
there is unlikely to be anything of novelty. Its main purpose is to make vivid
to those unfamiliar with this research program some of the striking ways that
content effects can enable or inhibit reasoning skill.
   Though tacit recognition of such effects goes back millennia (see }4 for a
3,000-year-old example) and explicit recognition goes back at least centuries
(see the passage from Hume above), modern study of the phenomenon can be
dated to the work by E. L. Thorndike and his students in the third decade of the
last century. In 1922, Thorndike published an article entitled “The effect of
Changed Data on Reasoning” in which he described a series of studies that
involved presenting students with familiar algebra problems. Across subjects,
the structures of the problems were held constant; the only differences were in
the embedded symbols. So, for instance, one group confronted equations
whose variables were indicated by x and y, while those in the second group
faced structurally identical equations whose variables were indicated by b1 and
b2. The results of these small changes were dramatic; error rates in tasks

=== p. 119 ===

presented with complicated symbols were up to five times greater than in those
with simple symbols (Thorndike 1922: 36).2
   Six years later, his student Minna Cheves Wilkins undertook a dissertation-length study that presented subjects with a range of syllogistic tasks, asking
them to judge whether certain conclusions followed from certain pairs of
premises. Some involved terms that were “familiar and concrete” (“Some of
the girls in the chorus wear their hair braided; all the girls in the chorus wear
their hair bobbed; therefore . . .”); others involved symbols (“All x’s are z’s; all x’s
are y’s; therefore . . .”). Yet others involved complicated nonsense terms (“No
juritobians are cantabilians; no cantixianti are cantabilians; therefore . . .”) or
terms for which the subjects had antecedent views about their relations (“If
New York is to the right of Detroit; and Chicago is to the left of New York;
then . . .”). Across subjects, results were quite consistent:3 “Most items increase
in difficulty as the material is changed from familiar to symbolic, etc., but a few
items representing very common fallacies are much less difficult in symbolic
material than in familiar” (Wilkins 1928: 52–77).
   In the eight decades following Wilkins’s and Thorndike’s pioneering work,
much has been learned about which sorts of embeddings tend to facilitate or
impede reasoning. Though the nuances are many, Wilkins’s fundamental observation—that subjects’ tendency to reason validly is typically improved when
materials are presented with familiar content, though there are also cases where
familiar content may interfere with their ability to identify valid structures—
has been borne out. In particular, in cases where subjects are asked to attend to
formal properties alone, the presence of certain sorts of content seems to
enhance or inhibit their ability to draw appropriate conclusions on the basis
of structural features.
   Much of the research demonstrating these sorts of interference effects has
made great use of two well-known paradigms: syllogism tasks (described in this
paragraph) and Wason selection tasks (described below). In the first, subjects are
presented with a set of premises, and asked to determine whether a particular
conclusion follows logically from them. Stimuli vary along two dimensions:

  2
     [1, modified ] Thorndike’s conclusion was sweeping. He maintained that “any disturbance
whatsoever in the concrete particulars reasoned with will interfere somewhat with the
reasoning, making it less correct or slower or both” (Thorndike 1922: 33). Thorndike
explained these results in strictly associationist terms: he held that “the mind is ruled by
habit throughout” with reasoning being no more than “the organization and cooperation of
habits” (Thorndike 1922: 33). Though the heirs of this research program have tended to reject
Thorndike’s explanation of the mechanisms, the phenomenon he identified has withstood the
test of time.
  3
     [2, modified ] Wilkins was careful to note that there were individual differences among her
subjects: some provided correct answers in (nearly) all cases. (She did not measure reaction
time.) In recent years, these differences have been explored in detail in by Keith Stanovich and
Richard West (see e.g. Stanovich and West 2000 [added 2009: Stanovich and West 2008]; cf. also
Epstein et al. 1996).

=== p. 120 ===

some of the reasoning patterns are valid whereas others are invalid; and some of
the conclusions are independently plausible whereas others are independently
implausible. Presented with such stimuli, subjects consistently exhibit belief-bias: structurally identical valid inferences are far less likely to be judged valid
when their conclusions are implausible (“some vitamin tablets are not nutritional”) than when their conclusions are plausible (“some highly trained dogs
are not police dogs”); structurally identical invalid inferences are far less likely
to be judged invalid when their conclusions are plausible than when their
conclusions are implausible. (Cf. Evans et al. 1983, reviewed in Evans 2003;
for suggestive work about the associated functional neuroanatomy, see Goel
and Dolan 2003; Goel et al. 2000).
   In the second, the Wason selection task (Wason 1966), subjects are presented
with four cards and told that each card has an F-type feature (say, a number) on
one side and a G-type feature (say, a letter) on the other. The subject is then
presented with a (material) conditional statement that takes the following
form: “If a card’s F-feature is x, then its G-feature is y” and asked which cards
she would need to turn over to verify the statement’s truth. The first card shows
an instance of an F-feature which is x (F/x); the second shows an instance of an
F-feature which is not x (F/not-x); the third shows an instance of a G-feature
which is y (G/y); the fourth shows an instance of a G-feature which is not y (G/
not-y). The appropriate response to such a question is to turn over exactly two
cards: the first (F/x) card and the fourth (G/not-y) card.
   Presented with certain abstract versions of the task, subjects tend to perform
poorly. If, for example, subjects are asked to verify the (material conditional)
statement: “if there is an A on one side, there is a 3 on the other” for the set of
cards pictured below, fewer than 10% correctly turn over exactly the “A” and
the “7”; instead, they typically turn over the “A” and the “3,” or the “A” only.

A                              D                               3                              7

  If the task is altered slightly, however, so that subjects are presented with the
same set of four cards, but with the instruction “if there is an A on one side,
there is not a 7 on the other” subjects nearly universally turn over the correct
pair of cards. This tendency to match response to cue (in the first case the
consequent mentioned “3,” whereas in the second case, it mentioned “7”)
goes by the name matching bias.4

   4
     [4] For an overview of the enormous body of research conducted using this paradigm, see
Evans 1998 and relevant articles mentioned in its bibliography. For discussion of a process of
training subjects to inhibit matching bias, along with intriguing data about its possible neural
underpinnings, see Houdé et al. 2000.

=== p. 121 ===

  Interestingly, certain tasks seem not to induce this sort of matching bias.5 So,
for example, success rates are extremely high when the sentences to be verified
resemble this one: “if a person is drinking beer, then the person must be at least
21 years of age.” In such cases, a vast majority of subjects (correctly) turn over
the “beer” and the “16” (and not, as would parallel the previous case, the “beer”
and the “21”) (cf. Griggs and Cox 1982).6

Beer                        Coke                         21 years                         16 years

  Related content-based effects can be found in a wide range of forced-choice
tasks. In a 1994 study, for example, Veronika Denes-Raj and Seymour Epstein
presented subjects with pairs of bowls containing varying numbers of red and
white jelly beans. Subjects were told that they would win $1 for each trial in
which they drew a red jelly bean, and then given a choice about which of the two
bowls they would prefer to draw from blindly. The first bowl always contained 1
red jelly bean and 9 white beans, while the other contained 100 beans total, with
the proportion of red to white ranging from 9:100 (9 red and 91 white) to 5:100
(5 red and 95 white). Each bowl was labeled with an index card clearly indicating
the percentage of red jelly beans that it contained (10%, 9%, 8%, etc.).
  Despite the presence of the monetary incentive and the explicit information
about relative likelihood of success, well over half the subjects chose the 9:100
(9%) and 8:100 (8%) bowls over the 1:10 (10%) bowl and more than a quarter
chose the 5:100 (5%) bowl over the 1:10 (10%). Overall, more than 80% of
subjects made at least one non-optimal choice in the five trials each faced.

  5
     [5] There are at least five features that seem consistently to produce increased speed and
accuracy in Wason-style tasks: (a) using concrete and meaningful terms in articulating the rule
and describing the cards; (b) presenting the task as one of determining a rule-violation rather
than the truth or falsity of a statement; (c) embedding the task within the context of a scenario
where the subject is given a particular role to play; (d) providing the subject with a rationale or
justification for the rule; and (e) relating the two rule components in a meaningful way
(Dominowski 1995: 45).
  Numerous hypotheses have been offered to explain these patterns of response, among them
that certain embedded tasks trigger a pragmatic reasoning schema (cf. e.g. Cheng and Holyoak
1985; Cheng, Holyoak, Nisbett, and Oliver 1986), that they trigger a modular social exchange
algorithm (cf. e.g. Cosmides 1989; Gigerenzer and Hug 1992) and that different mental models
are activated by different presentations of conditional content (cf. e.g. Johnson-Laird and
Byrne 2002). Others have argued on Bayesian grounds that typical reasoning patterns on
Wason-style tasks are actually rational (cf. e.g. Oaksford and Chater 1994, 1996). None of these
accounts has been universally accepted, and it seems likely that the full story will turn out to
be quite complicated.
  6
     [6] Interestingly, the effect is reduced in cases where the pairing is judged as unlikely: fewer
subjects turn over the final card if it reads “12 years” and fewer still if it reads “4 years” (Kirby
1994).

=== p. 122 ===

When asked about their selections, “subjects reported that although they knew
the probabilities were against them, they felt they had a better chance when
there were more red beans . . . They made statements such as, ‘I picked the ones
with more red jelly beans because it looked like there were more ways to get a
winner, even though I knew there were also more whites, and that the percents
were against me’ ”7 (Denes-Raj and Epstein 1994: 819, 823).
  The literature on heuristics and biases is replete with such examples.8 Readers
are presumably familiar with many of Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky’s
famous cases. In the Linda-the-bank-teller case, for example, subjects are presented with a description of an imaginary character, Linda, that reads as follows:

  Linda is 31 years old, single, outspoken and very bright. She majored in philosophy. As a student, she was deeply concerned with issues of discrimination and
  social justice, and also participated in anti-nuclear demonstrations (Tversky and
  Kahneman 1983: 297).

Subjects are then presented with a set of eight statements about Linda, and are
asked to rank them in order of likelihood. Among the statements are the following:

  Linda is a bank Teller. (T)
  Linda is a bank Teller and is active in the Feminist movement. (TþF)

Even when subjects are highly educated, even when they are graduate students
in a decision science program, even when they are asked to bet money on their
choice, even when they are explicitly reminded that “bank teller” does not
mean “mere bank teller,” even when the logical relations between the two
statements are made transparent—even in all these cases, there is a striking
tendency for subjects to choose TþF (Teller and Feminist) as more probable
than T (Teller) (Crandall and Greenfield 1986; Epstein et al. 1999; cf. Tversky
and Kahneman 1983). As Stephen Jay Gould remarks in his own reminiscence
about encountering the case: “I know that [TþF] is least probable, yet a little
homunculus in my head continues to jump up and down, shouting at me—‘but
she can’t just be a bank teller; read the description’” (Gould 1991: 469).
   The same goes for each of the cases discussed above. Even subjects who
regularly provide correct answers to abstract match-violating Wason tasks are
consistently faster (and consistently more accurate under conditions of cognitive load) at solving suitably matched or embedded tasks. Likewise in the case of

  7
    [Note added in 2009: I would now diagnose this as a case where the subject believes that she
has a better chance of picking a red bean if she goes for the 1:10 plate, but she has an alief with
the content “lots of red stuff over there in the 8:100 bowl; red means win-a-prize; choose the
bowl with all the nice red things in it.” For further discussion, see Gendler 2008a, 2008b; Chs.
13 and 14 below.]
  8
    [7] Three classic collections are Gilovich et al. 2002; Kahneman et al. 1982; and Kahneman
and Tversky 2000.

=== p. 123 ===

belief-matched (as opposed to belief-mismatched) syllogisms, and in tasks like
Denes-Raj and Epstein’s number/proportion task. Everyone—even those who
are ultimately able to override (or endorse for the right reasons) the inclination
that leads to error (or success) in the cases under consideration—feels the pull of
the competing response.9
   One promising framework for explaining these patterns of response is the
family of theories that have come to be known as dual systems accounts.10
According to such accounts, there are at least two clusters of subsystems
involved in mental processing—one associative and instinctive, operating rapidly and automatically; the other rule-based and regulated, operating in a
relatively slow and controlled fashion. Numerous formulations of this distinction have been proposed—diverging in important details that matter a great
deal for a number of important debates. But for our purposes, their commonalities are more important than their differences.11
   A typical such account is Steven Sloman’s Two Systems model, according to
which human reasoning can be usefully thought of as involving both an
Associative and a Rule-Based System. The Associative System (sometimes called
“System I”) operates on principles of similarity and contiguity; takes personal
experience as its source of knowledge; operates on concrete and generic concepts, images, stereotypes, and feature sets; makes use of relations of association
that serve as soft constraints; exhibits processing that is reproductive but

    9
      [Note added in 2009: This phenomenon appears to be quite general. Indeed, Adele
Diamond and Natasha Kirkham have suggested that perhaps “adults do not fully grow out of
any of the cognitive or perceptual biases of infancy and early childhood” and that although “in
adults, these biases are surely more subtle,” there is reason to think that using sufficiently
nuanced measures (such as reaction time, eyetracking, and neuroimaging), “all biases found in
young children can be found in adults” (Diamond and Kirkham 2005: 296). A number of recent
studies support this hypothesis. ERP work by Daurignac et al., for example, suggests that “adult
subjects still must inhibit the length-equals-number heuristic, an automatic visuospatial bias
from early childhood, to perform analytical processes and succeed in [simple] numerical
[matching] task[s]” (Daurignac et al. 2006: 734; for related fMRI work, see Leroux et al. 2009).
And eyetracking and reaction-time work by Epley, Morewedge, and Keyser suggests that
“childlike egocentrism”—the failure to recognize that another’s perspective may differ from
one’s own—“isn’t outgrown so much as it is overcome each time a person attempts to adopt
another’s perspective” (Epley et al. 2004: 765).]
   10
      [Note added in 2009: My encounter with this literature—beginning with my exposure to
the work of Kahneman and Tversky in 1991, and continuing for the subsequent two decades—
has profoundly influenced my thought about nearly all of the issues addressed in this volume.
In particular, it underpins my views about the role of concrete cases in philosophical reasoning,
particularly the role of thought experiments (Chs. 1–6), and it lies at the core of my more recent
work on alief (Chs. 13 and 14).]
   11
      [8] For additional representative discussions, see the essays collected in Chaiken and Trope
1999; as well as Evans 2003, 2008; Evans and Over 1996; Gigerenzer and Regier 1996; Hinton
1990; Smolensky 1988; Stanovich 1999; Stanovich and West 2000. For intriguing early
discussions, see James 1890/1950; Piaget 1929; Neisser 1963. [Added in 2009: For a more
recent collection of discussions, see Evans and Frankish 2009, which includes a helpful
introductory chapter that provides historical context for contemporary work on dual
processing.]

=== p. 124 ===

capable of similarity-based generalization; uses overall feature computation and
constraint satisfaction; is automatic; and is exemplified by functions such as
intuition, fantasy, creativity, imagination, visual recognition, and associative
memory. By contrast, the Rule-Based System (sometimes called “System II”)
operates on principles of symbol manipulation; takes language, culture, and
formal systems as its sources of knowledge; operates on concrete, generic, and
abstract concepts, abstracted features, and compositional symbols; makes use of
causal, logical, and hierarchical relations that serve as hard constraints; exhibits
processing that is productive and systematic; uses abstractions of relevant
features; is strategic; and is exemplified by functions such as deliberation,
explanation, formal analysis, verification, ascription of purpose, and strategic
memory (Sloman 1996: 7).12
  As Daniel Gilbert points out, however, there is nothing sacred about the
“dual” in dual processing. He writes:
the neuroscientist who says that a particular phenomenon is the result of two processes
usually means to say something unambiguous [about] . . . the activities of two different
brain regions . . . [but] dry psychologists who champion dual-process models are not
usually stuck on two. Few would come undone if their models were recast in terms of
three processes, or four, or even five . . . claims about dual processes in dry psychology are
not so much claims about how many processes there are, but claims about how many
processes there aren’t. And the claim is this: There aren’t one. (Gilbert 1999: 3–4)13

   For our purposes, the moral is simply this. Decades of research in cognitive
psychology have demonstrated that when content is presented in a suitably
concrete or abstract way, this may result in the activation or fortification of a
representational schema that was otherwise inactive or subordinate. The result
of this may be to evoke responses that run counter to those evoked by alternative presentations of relevantly similar content. So, far from being an anomalous or idiosyncratic feature of arcane or unusual cases, the discrepancy noted
in our opening story is—in fact—a central feature of our mental lives.

3. Thought Experiments and Elusive Equilibrium

So far, we have been considering cases where it is clear what the right answer is,
and where (at least in some cases) we have a fairly systematic understanding of
the sorts of factors that lead subjects astray. When subjects turn over the A and
the 3 in the A–D–3–7 task described above, they make a mistake; when they

   12
      [Note added in 2009 (with some text taken from the original 2007 paper): There are
numerous other accounts as well. One that has been particularly influential for my own work
is that of Seymour Epstein; cf. Denes-Raj and Epstein 1994; Epstein 1990.]
   13
      [Note added in 2009: Indeed, Keith Stanovich has recently suggested a tripartite theory; cf.
Stanovich 2009.]

=== p. 125 ===

turn over the A and the 7, they do not. When the sentence to be confirmed is:
“if there is an A on one side, there is a 3 on the other,” even subjects who
ultimately respond correctly are somewhat drawn to the card with the 3; when
the sentence to be confirmed is: “if there is an A on one side, there is not a 7 on
the other,” even subjects who face persistent difficulties with the A–3 formulation are easily able to turn over the correct cards. Likewise with the syllogism
tasks: When subjects conclude that an invalid inference with a true conclusion
is valid, they err—and when they err, it tends to be because an independent
judgment about the truth or falsity of the conclusion interferes with their
judgment concerning the inference’s validity. Like optical illusions, these cognitive illusions seem to be artifacts of deep features of our cognitive architecture: the “little homunculus in [our] head” will continue to “jump up and
down,” whether or not we can train ourselves to discount its cries when non-homuncular reasoning is called for. Just as we cannot simply talk ourselves out
of seeing Müller-Lyer lines as different in length, we cannot simply talk ourselves out of feeling drawn towards turning over the 3.14
   What implications does this have for philosophical methodology? It seems to
me that the implications are both liberating and disturbing—and that these are
two sides of the same coin. For if something akin to dual processing lies at the
root of most human reasoning, then a philosophical theory may be correct
even if we consistently and resiliently react to specific cases in ways that run
counter to the theory’s predictions. But this introduction of an additional
degree of freedom into the enterprise of philosophical explanation may introduce a feeling of vertigo.15
   Recent neuroimaging work on moral reasoning has brought this challenge to
the fore in the context of the “trolley problem” (Thomson 1985). According to
these accounts, contemplating the original trolley case16 appears to produce
increased neural activity in what are sometimes referred to as the “higher

   14
      [9] Habits of attention may mitigate the effects somewhat; one can learn to approach
questions of validity by automatically mentally substituting content-neutral expressions for
content-distracting ones. I discuss this in more detail in the context of philosophical thought
experiments in }4 below.
   15
      [10, abbreviated ] For a related discussion of these matters that comes to somewhat similar
conclusions, see Sunstein 2005. [Added in 2009: See also Sinnott-Armstrong 2008a, 2008c.]
   16
      [In main text in published version] The classic presentation of the case (which Thomson
attributes to Philippa Foot) can be found in Thomson 1985: “Suppose you are the driver of a
trolley. The trolley rounds a bend, and there come into view ahead five track workmen, who
have been repairing the track. The track goes through a bit of a valley at that point, and the sides
are steep, so you must stop the trolley if you are to avoid running the five men down. You step
on the brakes, but alas they don’t work. Now you suddenly see a spur of track leading off to the
right. You can turn the trolley onto it, and thus save the five men on the straight track ahead.
Unfortunately, Mrs. Foot has arranged that there is one track workman on that spur of track. He
can no more get off the track in time than the five can, so you will kill him if you turn the trolley
onto him. Is it morally permissible for you to turn the trolley?— Everyone to whom I have put
this hypothetical case says, Yes, it is” (Thomson 1985: 1395).

=== p. 126 ===

cognitive” regions of the brain, contemplating cases such as “fat man”17 (where
the imagined action is “up close and personal”) appears to produce increased
neural activity in “emotional/social” regions (cf. Greene et al. 2001). Intriguing
confirmation of this suggestion can be found in subsequent work by Antonio
Damasio et al. suggesting that subjects with ventromedial prefrontal cortex
damage (damage associated, among other things, with impaired emotional
processing) are more than twice as likely as controls to consider it morally
acceptable to push the fat man (or to suffocate a crying baby in order to save
a group of people who are hiding) (Koenigs et al. 2007).
   Of course, all of this is fully compatible with there being a genuine deep
moral difference between the two acts—deep enough to render the one morally
mandatory and the other morally prohibited. Nothing that I have said here or
elsewhere should be taken to deny the possibility that—as Mill writes at the
beginning of Utilitarianism—“whatever steadiness and consistency our moral
beliefs have attained has been mainly due to the tacit influence of a standard
not yet recognized” (Mill 1861/2001: 3).
   That said, it is worth taking seriously other work that suggests that intuitions
about such cases may vary along dimensions that are (presumably) morally
irrelevant. Psychologist David Pizarro, for example, presented subjects with “fat
man” trolley cases that differed only in the nature of the sacrifice involved: in
the one case, a man named Chip Ellsworth III could be thrown off a bridge to
stop a trolley hurtling towards 100 members of the Harlem Jazz Orchestra; in
the other, a man named Tyrone Peyton could be thrown off to save 100
members of the New York Philharmonic.18 Politically liberal subjects were
significantly more likely to consider it morally acceptable to sacrifice Chip to
save the Harlem Jazz Orchestra than to sacrifice Tyrone to save the New York
Philharmonic (presumably an overcorrection of an initial instinctively racist
response) (Uhlmann, Pizarro et al. 2009: 482–3).

  17
       [In main text in published version] The “fat man” case, again in Thomson’s 1985 version, is as
follows: “Consider a case—which I shall call Fat Man—in which you are standing on a
footbridge over the trolley track. You can see a trolley hurtling down the track, out of control.
You turn around to see where the trolley is headed, and there are five workmen on the track
where it exits from under the footbridge. What to do? Being an expert on trolleys, you know of
one certain way to stop an out-of-control trolley: Drop a really heavy weight in its path. But
where to find one? It just so happens that standing next to you on the footbridge is a fat man, a
really fat man. He is leaning over the railing, watching the trolley; all you have to do is give him
a little shove, and over the railing he will go, onto the track in the path of the trolley. Would it
be permissible for you to do this? Everyone to whom I have put this case says it would not be”
(Thomson 1985: 1409).
   18
       [11] Non-American readers may be helped by learning that the name “Chip Ellsworth III”
evokes images of a wealthy white man, whereas “Tyrone Peyton” evokes images of a man of
African descent; likewise, the New York Philharmonic is an elite, largely white and Asian,
orchestra, whereas the Harlem Jazz Orchestra is associated with the African American
community.

=== p. 127 ===

   Whether or not there is a moral difference between the original trolley case
and the fat man case, it seems clear that there is no moral difference between
sacrificing Tyrone and sacrificing Chip.19 But if our only basis for thinking that
there is a moral difference between the fat man and original trolley cases is that
subjects tend to respond differently to them, we should be disturbed to discover
that parallel differences can be evoked by what seem clearly to be morally
irrelevant variables.20
   Even more disturbingly, subjects’ responses to moral dilemmas can be varied
through deliberate unconscious priming. It is not surprising to learn that when
presented with otherwise identical scenarios in which American (or Iraqi)
troops cause anticipated but unintentional collateral damage to Iraqi (or Amer-ican) civilians, politically conservative subjects are significantly more likely to
judge the American-on-Iraqi damage to be morally acceptable than the other
way around, whereas politically liberal subjects make precisely the opposite
judgment. The more surprising result is that these effects can be induced
regardless of political conviction—simply by prompting subjects to unscramble
sentences containing terms associated either with patriotism or multiculturalism:21 Subjects primed with patriotic terms tend to assess the scenarios as
conservatives do, whereas subjects primed with multiculturalist terms respond
much like liberals22 (Uhlman, Pizarro et al. 2009: 486–9).
   Nor is there anything special about moral intuitions in this regard. In epistemology, for example, Jonathan Weinberg and colleagues have discovered that
subjects’ willingness to attribute knowledge in ambiguous cases “increases after
being presented with a clear case of non-knowledge, and . . . decreases after
being presented with a clear case of knowledge” (Swain et al. 2008: 138). John
Hawthorne and I demonstrate related sorts of shiftiness in fake barn cases
(Gendler and Hawthorne 2005; Ch. 5 above).23 And Joshua Knobe and Shaun
Nichols have found presentation-dependent differences in judgments of free
will and moral responsibility depending on whether examples are presented
abstractly or concretely (Nichols and Knobe 2007).

  19
     [12] Of course, this judgment is itself grounded in some sort of intuitive reaction. For
discussion of the unavoidability of appeal to intuition in philosophical reasoning, see Bealer
1998; Goldman 2007; Pust 2000; Sosa 2007a, 2007b; Williamson 2005.
  20
     [13] Admittedly, the differences that Pizarro observes are less extreme than those evoked
by the original trolley/fat man contrast. (But there are good naturalistic reasons to expect this.)
  21
     [14] “Scrambled sentence” tasks—in which subjects are presented with a series of word
clusters that they are asked to form into sentences (e.g. “flies high the flag” or “very dogs loyal
are”)—are a standard technique in social psychology for “priming” unconscious associations.
  22
     [15] The work of Pizarro cited here is representative of a large research program in
contemporary psychology exploring the status and source of moral intuition. For
representative examples, see de Waal 1996; Haidt 2001; Haidt and Joseph 2004; Hauser 2006
and sources cited therein.
  23
     [16] For an overview of the issue of intuitions and epistemology, see Alexander and
Weinberg 2007; [added 2009: see also J. Nagel 2008, J. Nagel forthcoming].

=== p. 128 ===

   Though specific stories can be told about any given case, the accumulated
implications can seem dizzying.24 If intuitions cannot serve as a fixed point for
philosophical theorizing, then much that has been widely taken as philosophical orthodoxy may be up for grabs.25 Of course, careful work regarding particular examples may allow the reclaiming of some aspects of traditional intuition-based methodology.26 But the accumulated evidence reviewed in }}2 and 3
suggests that at least some of the utility of philosophical thought experiments
may lie in another direction. It is to this issue that I turn in the final section.

4. Thought Experiments as Devices of Framing and Persuasion

A common insight lies at the heart of both Kantian and utilitarian moral theorizing: that to reason in accord with the dictates of morality is to view oneself as
unexceptional. Immanuel Kant’s Categorical Imperative requires that “I should
never act except in such a way that I can also will that my maxim should become a
universal law” (Kant 1785/1981: 402). That is, morality requires that personal
desires be filtered through a universalizing lens: my own desires may serve as bases
for willed action only if I can at the same time coherently will that others in similar
circumstances would act in the way that I am choosing to act. Despite important
differences between the views, a similar core insight lies at the heart of Jeremy
Bentham’s famous utilitarian formulation that “everybody [is] to count for one,
nobody for more than one” (Bentham 1789/1961, cited by Mill 1861/2001: 62).

  24
      [17] In addition to concerns about intrasubjective variation, there are also grounds for
unease about intersubjective variation. Widely touted work by Jonathan Weinberg, Stephen
Stich, and Shaun Nichols seems to suggest that there are important cultural differences in how
college-aged subjects respond to some of the central examples in the epistemological literature
(Weinberg, Nichols, and Stich 2001). Similar worries are raised in an intracultural context by
Robert Cummins, who notes: “It is commonplace for researchers in the current Theory of
Content to proceed as if [Twin Earth] intuitions were undisputed . . . Nor is the reason for this
practice far to seek. The Putnamian . . . take on these cases is widely enough shared to allow for a
range of thriving intramural sports among believers. Those who do not share the intuitions are
simply not invited to the games . . . [I]t is all too easy for insiders to suppose that dissenters just
do not understand the case. If we are honest with ourselves, I think we will have to confront the
fact that selection effects . . . are likely to be pretty widespread in contemporary philosophy”
(Cummins 1998).
  25
      [In main text in published version] On the basis of related considerations, for example, Brian
Weatherson writes: “Intuitively, Gettier cases are instances of justified true beliefs that are not
cases of knowledge. Should we therefore conclude that knowledge is not justified true belief?
Only if we have reason to trust intuition here. But intuitions are unreliable in a wide range of
cases. And it can be argued that Gettier intuitions have a greater resemblance to unreliable
intuitions than to reliable intuitions. What’s distinctive about the faulty intuitions, I argue, is
that respecting them would mean abandoning a simple, systematic and largely successful
theory in favour of a complicated, disjunctive and idiosyncratic theory. So maybe respecting
the Gettier intuitions was the wrong reaction, we should instead have been explaining why we
are so easily misled by these kinds of cases” (Weatherson 2003b: 1).
  26
      [18] For some reflections on this issue, see Weinberg et al. (MS) and sources cited therein.

=== p. 129 ===

Here, too, one’s own interests may legitimately enter into decision-making only
insofar as they are weighed equally alongside the interests of others: first-person
exceptionalism is morally prohibited.
   For the purposes of discussion in this section, let’s use the term moral stance
for stances that prohibit first-person exceptionalism. And let’s consider the
question: How might one make this stance cognitively available to the subject
at moments of moral decision-making?
   In answering this question, it is worth reminding ourselves that among the
most resilient of our cognitive tendencies is exactly the tendency to hold
ourselves to different standards than those to which we hold others. So, for
example, as Emily Pronin notes in a review article, summarizing a wide range of
recent work, study after study has shown that “people overestimate the extent
to which they personally are influenced by ‘objective’ concerns and/or overestimate the extent to which others are influenced by ‘self-serving’ concerns”
(Pronin et al. 2004). “They assume that people who work hard at their jobs are
motivated by external incentives such as money, whereas they claim that they
personally are motivated by internal incentives” (Pronin 2007: 37–8); they
consistently overestimate the likelihood that they will act generously or selflessly, while accurately predicting the ungenerosity and selfishness of others
(whom they most likely turn out to resemble). Repeated studies have shown
that “people on average tend to think they are more charitable, cooperative,
considerate, fair, kind, loyal, and sincere than the typical person but less
belligerent, deceitful, gullible, lazy, impolite, mean, and unethical.” The same
holds for specific predictions of behavior: “people generally think they are more
likely than their peers to rebel in the Milgram obedience studies, cooperate in a
prisoner’s dilemma game, distribute collective funds equitably, and give up
their seat on a crowded bus to a pregnant woman . . . [they] tend to believe
they will resolve moral dilemmas by selecting the saintly course of action but
that others will behave more selfishly” (Epley and Dunning 2000). And they
“tend to see their futures as overly rosy, to see their traits as overly positive, to
take too much credit for successful outcomes and to disregard evidence that
threatens their self esteem” (Pronin 2007: 37). It is no exaggeration to say that
the tendency towards first-person exceptionalism is among the most widespread and pervasive of our tendencies towards bias.
   This tendency finds powerful voice in the biblical story of David and Bath-sheba (2 Samuel: 11–12).27 David, who is King of Israel, is walking along the
roof of his palace when he catches sight of an attractive woman—Bathsheba—
washing herself nearby. Taken by her beauty, he has her brought to the palace,
where he proceeds to lie with her, though she is married to another man. She
becomes pregnant, and David arranges to have her husband Uriah sent to fight

  27
      [19] Thanks to Tim Crane for pointing out to me the philosophical potential of this story
in a related context.

=== p. 130 ===

“in the forefront of the hottest battle . . . that he may be smitten and die.” Uriah
is killed, and David proceeds to take Bathsheba as his wife.
   God is (understandably enough) rather displeased by David’s behavior, and
seeks to help him see the ways in which it is problematic. But God recognizes
the deep human tendency towards first-person exceptionalism, and seeks a way
to speak to David that will circumvent this tendency. So “the Lord sent Nathan
unto David,” and Nathan proceeds to tell David the following story:
There were two men in one city; the one rich, and the other poor. The rich man had
exceeding many flocks and herds: But the poor man had nothing, save one little ewe
lamb, which . . . grew up together with him, and . . . was unto him as a daughter. And there
came a traveler unto the rich man, and he spared to take of his own flock . . . but took the
poor man’s lamb, and dressed it for the man that was come to him.

When David hears this story, his “anger [is] greatly kindled against the man.”
He holds the man to be deserving of disapprobation and punishment, and says
to Nathan: “As the Lord liveth, the man that hath done this thing shall surely
die. And he shall restore the lamb fourfold, because he did this thing, and
because he had no pity.”
   At this point, the circumstances have been set for the delivery of the punchline. Nathan says famously to David:
Thou art the man . . . thou hast killed Uriah the Hittite with the sword, and hast taken his
wife to be thy wife, and hast slain him with the sword of the children of Ammon . . .

With a shock of recognition, David reframes his understanding of the circumstances in which he has placed himself, and says to Nathan: “I have sinned
against the Lord.”
  By presenting the story in a way that prevents David from exhibiting first-person bias with respect to what turn out to be his own actions, Nathan has
enabled David to acknowledge a moral commitment that he holds in principle,
but has failed to apply in this particular case.28 There is no ambiguity here about
which commitment, on reflection, David endorses: the story he has been told is
fully effective; it reshapes his cognitive frame, and brings him to view his own
previous actions in its light.
  Despite being relatively schematic, the narrative is a vivid one, engaging the
reader’s imagination as she hears about David’s and Nathan’s actions, and
David’s imagination as he hears of the behavior of the imaginary rich man
who slays the poor man’s sheep. Within the domain of philosophy, broadly
construed, there is a tradition that emphasizes the capacity of the literary form
to appropriately represent moral complexity, contrasting this with the tradition
of austere philosophical theorizing. Martha Nussbaum maintains that “there

  28
     [Note added in 2009: For related discussion of the effects of overcoming first-person
exceptionalism, see }4.2 of “Self-Deception as Pretense” (2008c; Ch. 8 below).]

=== p. 131 ===

may be some views of the world and how one should live in it . . . that cannot be
fully and adequately stated in the language of conventional philosophical
prose . . . but only in a language and in forms themselves more complex, more
allusive, more attentive to particulars” (Nussbaum 1990: 3). Noting that there
has been a “predominant tendency in contemporary Anglo-American philosophy . . . to ignore the relation between form and content . . . or . . . [to] treat[ ] style
as largely decorative—as irrelevant to the stating of content,” she emphasizes
instead the “importance of taking style seriously in its expressive and statement-making functions” (Nussbaum 1990: 8).
   While Nussbaum is surely right that the dominant tendency in Western
philosophical theorizing has been one that holds form and content to be
isolable in these ways, there is also an important strand—even among the
most austere of philosophical writers—that explicitly or tacitly acknowledges
the force that presentational features can play. Even Kant, who held that “worse
service cannot be rendered morality than that an attempt be made to derive it
from examples” (Kant 1785/1981: 408), gives some weight to this perspective.
In the course of the Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, he famously formulates the Categorical Imperative in a number of different ways. Though he
maintains that these “ways of representing the principle of morality are at
bottom only so many formulas of the very same law,” he remarks that “nevertheless there is a difference in them which is subjectively rather than objectively practical, viz., it is intended to bring an idea of reason closer to intuition (in
accordance with a certain analogy) and thereby closer to feeling” (Kant 1785/
1981: 436).
   Viewed in this light, moral and political philosophy have a secondary task
that runs alongside the task of ascertaining what morality demands, namely,
that of providing the reader with resources that enable her to make the perspective shift that the moral stance requires at the moment of moral decision-making. In this regard, one of the tasks of such philosophical inquiry is to
identify images that can play the role that Nathan’s story did with respect to
David: images that will bring the reader to reframe her experience of some
morally valenced situation, in such a way that her apprehension of the morally
relevant features of it are re-experienced in light of the scenario presented. It is
this role, I want to suggest, that is played by some of the most famous thought
experiments in moral and political theorizing.
   Take, for example, one of the most widely discussed aspects of John Rawls’s
enormously influential A Theory of Justice—his “device of representation” for
thinking about the principles that would govern the basic structure of a just
society. In the first chapter of the book, he introduces the famous example of
the “original position”—a “purely hypothetical” situation where “no one
knows his place in society, his class position or social status, nor does any one
know his fortune in the distribution of natural assets and abilities, his intelligence, strength and the like.” From behind this “veil of ignorance,” principles

=== p. 132 ===

are chosen that will regulate “the kinds of social cooperation that can be
entered into and the forms of government that can be established.” The principles governing a just society will be those that “free and rational persons
concerned to further their own interests would accept in [such] an initial
position of equality as defining the terms of their association” (Rawls 1971/
1999: }3).29
   My suggestion is that, to the extent that Rawls’s “device of representation” is
effective, it is because it plays the same role as Nathan’s story of the rich man
and the sheep: it provides the subject with a powerful frame through which the
target material—decisions about the appropriate structure for resource-distribution in society—can be reconceptualized. It seeks to make the moral stance
cognitively available at a moment of moral decision-making. Much like some of
the framings discussed in }2 above, it directs the attention towards (what Rawls
holds to be) morally relevant aspects of the decision-making situation, and
away from those that are (held to be) morally irrelevant.
   With these examples in place, it is time to return to the themes of the
opening section. What I have suggested is that by presenting content in a
suitably concrete or abstract way, thought experiments may recruit representational schemas that were previously inactive. As a result, they may evoke
responses that run counter to those evoked by alternative presentations of
relevantly similar content. But exactly because of this, these responses may
well remain in disequilibrium with responses evoked in alternative ways. When
thought experiments succeed as devices of persuasion, it is because the evoked
response becomes dominant, so that the subject comes (either reflectively or
unreflectively) to represent relevant non-thought-experimental content in
light of the thought-experimental conclusion.30

  29
     [Note added in 2009: For a similar example, discussed in some detail in the original (2007)
version of this essay, see Anderson 2006. The 2007 version of the essay also includes a brief
discussion of Judith Jarvis Thomson’s violinist example (Thomson 1971).]
  30
     [20] Acknowledgements: For comments on talks that served as distant predecessors to this
essay, I am grateful to audiences at the Conference on Intuitions, Fribourg, Switzerland (2004);
Bergen Community College (2005); Union College (2005); Cornell University (2006); the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (2006); and the CUNY Graduate Center (2006).
For comments on a more recent incarnation, I am grateful to an audience at the University of
Toronto Workshop on Thought Experiments (2007), organized by James Robert Brown. For
comments on previous written versions of this essay, I thank Carolyn Caine and Zoltán Gendler
Szabó. [Added in 2009: For suggestions concerning the most recent abbreviated draft, I am
grateful to Aaron Norby.]

