=== chunk: davidson-1984-inquiries/conceptual-scheme ===
title: On the Very Idea of a Conceptual Scheme (Essay 13)
source_pdf: docs/sources/davidson-1984-inquiries/full.ocr.pdf
pdf_pages: 206-221
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 183
plan_page_end: 198
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 183 ===

1 3 On the Very ldea of a
           Conceptual Scheme

Philosophers of many persuasions are prone to talk of conceptual
schemes. Conceptual schemes, we are told, are ways of organizing
experience; they are systems of categories that give form to the data
of sensation; they are points of view from which individuals,
cultures, or periods survey the passing scene. There may be no
translating from one scheme to another, in which case the beliefs,
desires, hopes, and bits of knowledge that characterize one person
have no true counterparts for the subscriber to another scheme.
Reality itself 1s relative to a scheme: what counts as real in one
system may not in another.
  Even those thinkers who are certain there is only one conceptual
scheme are in the sway of the scheme concept; even monotheists
have   religion.   And   when   someone   sets   out   to   describe   ‘our
conceptual scheme’, his homey task assumes, if we take him literally,
that there might be rival systems.
  Conceptual relativism is a heady and exotic doctrine, or would be
if we could make good sense of it. The trouble is, as so often in
philosophy, it is hard to improve intelligibility while retaining the
excitement. At any rate that is what I shall argue.
  We are encouraged to imagine we understand massive conceptual
change or profound contrasts by legitimate examples of a familiar
sort. Sometimes an idea, like that of simultaneity as defined in
relativity theory, is so important that with its addition a whole
department of science takes on a new look. Sometimes revisions in
the list of sentences held true in a discipline are so central that we
may feel that the terms involved have changed their meanings.
Languages that have evolved in distant times or places may differ
extensively in their resources for dealing with one or another range

=== p. 184 ===

of phenomena. What comes easily in one language may come hard
in another, and this difference may echo significant dissimilarities in
style and value.
  But examples like these, impressive as they occasionally are, are not
so extreme but that the changes and the contrasts can be explained
and described using the equipment of a single language. Whorf,
wanting to demonstrate that Hopi incorporates a metaphysics so
alien to ours that Hopi and English cannot, as he puts it, ‘be
calibrated’, uses English to convey the contents of sample Hopi
sentences.’ Kuhn is brilliant at saying what things were like before
the revolution using—what else?—our post-revolutionary idiom.?
Quine gives us a feel for the ‘pre-individuative phase in the evolution
of our conceptual scheme’,® while Bergson tells us where we can go
to get a view of a mountain undistorted by one or another provincial
perspective,
  The dominant metaphor of conceptual relativism, that of differing
points of view, seems to betray an underlying paradox. Different
points of view make sense, but only      if there 1s a common co-ordinate
system on which to plot them; yet the existence of a common system
belies the claim of dramatic incomparability. What we need, it seems
to me, is some idea of the considerations that set the limits to
conceptual contrast. There are extreme suppositions that founder on
paradox or contradiction; there are modest examples we have no
trouble understanding. What determines where we cross from the
merely strange or novel to the absurd?
  We may accept the doctrine that associates having a language
with having a conceptual scheme. The relation may be supposed to
be this: where conceptual schemes differ, so do languages. But
speakers of different languages may share a conceptual scheme
provided there is a way of translating one language into the other.
Studying the criteria of translation is therefore a way of focusing on
criteria of identity for conceptual schemes. If conceptual schemes
aren’t associated with languages in this way, the original problem is
needlessly doubled, for then we would have to imagine the mind,
with its ordinary categories, operating with a language with its
organizing structure. Under the circumstances we would certainly
want to ask who is to be master.

  ! B. L. Whorf, ‘The Punctual and Segmentative Aspects of Verbs in Hopi’.
  2T. S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions.
  3 W. V. Quine, ‘Speaking of Objects’, 24.

=== p. 185 ===

  Alternatively, there is the idea that any language distorts reality,
which implies that it is only wordlessly if at all that the mind comes
to grips with things as they really are. This 1s to conceive language as
an inert (though necessarily distorting) medium independent of the
human agencies that employ it; a view of language that surely
cannot   be   maintained.   Yet if the   mind    can   grapple   without
distortion with the real, the mind itself must be without categories
and concepts. This featureless self is familiar from theories in quite
different parts of the philosophical landscape. There are, for
example, theories that make freedom consist in decisions taken
apart from all destres, habits, and dispositions of the agent; and
theories of knowledge that suggest that the mind can observe the
totality of its own perceptions and ideas. In each case, the mind is
divorced from the traits that constitute it; an inescapable conclusion
from certain lines of reasoning, as I said, but one that should always
persuade us to reject the premisses.
  We may identify conceptual schemes with languages, then, or
better, allowing for the possibility that more than one language may
express the same scheme, sets of intertranslatable languages.
Languages we will not think of as separable from souls; speaking a
language is not a trait a man can lose while retaining the power
of thought. So there is no chance that someone can take up a
vantage point for comparing conceptual schemes by temporarily
shedding his own. Can we then say that two people have different
conceptual schemes if they speak languages that fail of intertrans-latability?
  In what follows I consider two kinds of case that might be
expected to arise: complete, and partial, failures of translatability.
There would be complete failure if no significant range of sentences
in one language could be translated into the other; there would be
partial failure if some range could be translated and some range
could not (I shall neglect possible asymmetries.) My strategy will be
to argue that we cannot make sense of total failure, and then to
examine more briefly cases of partial failure.
  First, then, the purported cases of complete failure. It is tempting
to take a very short line indeed: nothing, it may be said, could count
as evidence that some form of activity could not be interpreted in
our language that was not at the same time evidence that that form
of activity was not speech behaviour. If this were right, we probably
ought to hold that a form of activity that cannot be interpreted as

=== p. 186 ===

language in our language is not speech behaviour. Putting matters
this way is unsatisfactory, however, for it comes to little more than
making translatability into a familiar tongue a criterion of language-hood. As fiat, the thesis lacks the appeal of self-evidence; if it is a
truth, as I think it is, it should emerge as the conclusion of an
argument.
  The credibility of the position is improved by reflection on the
close relations between language and the attribution of attitudes
such as belief, desire, and intention. On the one hand, it is clear that
speech requires a multitude of finely discriminated intentions and
beliefs. A person who asserts that perseverance keeps honour bright
must, for example, represent himself as believing that perseverance
keeps honour bright, and he must intend to represent himself as
believing it. On the other hand, it seems unlikely that we can
intelligibly attribute attitudes as complex as these to a speaker unless
we can translate his words into ours. There can be no doubt that the
relation between being able to translate someone’s language and
being able to describe his attitudes is very close. Still, until we can
say more about what this relation is, the case against untranslatable
languages remains obscure.
     It is sometimes thought that translatability into a familiar
language, say English, cannot be a criterion of languagehood on the
grounds that the relation of translatability is not transitive. The idea
is that some language, say Saturnian, may be translatable into
English,   and   some further language,     like   Plutonian,   may   be
translatable into Saturnian, while Plutonian is not translatable into
English. Enough translatable differences may add up to an untranslatable one. By imagining a sequence of [anguages, each close
enough to the one before to be acceptably translated into it, we can
imagine a language so different from English as to resist totally
translation into it. Corresponding to this distant language would be
a system of concepts altogether alien to us.
  This exercise does not, I think, introduce any new element into the
discussion. For we should have to ask how we recognized that what
the Saturnian was doing was franslating Plutonian (or anything
else). The Saturnian speaker might tell us that that was what he was
doing or rather we might for a moment assume that that was what
he was telling us. But then it would occur to us to wonder whether
our translations of Saturnian were correct.
  According to Kuhn, scientists operating in different scientific

=== p. 187 ===

traditions (within different ‘paradigms’) ‘work in different worlds’.*
Strawson’s The Bounds of Sense begins with the remark that ‘It is
possible to imagine kinds of worlds very different from the world as
we know it’.> Since there is at most one world, these pluralities are
metaphorical or merely imagined. The metaphors are, however, not
at all the same. Strawson 1nvites us to imagine possible non-actual
worlds, worlds that might be described, using our present language,
by redistributing truth values over sentences in various systematic
ways. The clarity of the contrasts between worlds in this case
depends on supposing our scheme of concepts, our descriptive
resources, to remain fixed. Kuhn, on the other hand, wants us to
think of different observers of the same world who come to it with
incommensurable systems of concepts. Strawson’s many 1magined
worlds are seen or heard or described from the same point of view,
Kuhn’s one world is seen from different points of view. It is the
second metaphor we want to work on.
  The first metaphor requires a distinction within language of
concept and content: using a fixed system of concepts (words with
fixed meanings) we describe alternative universes. Some sentences
will be true simply because of the concepts or meanings involved,
others because of the way of the world. In describing possible
worlds, we play with sentences of the second kind only.
  The second metaphor suggests instead a dualism of quite a
different sort,    a   dualism    of total    scheme      (or   language)   and
uninterpreted content. Adherence to the second dualism, while not
inconsistent with adherence to the first, may be encouraged by
attacks on the first. Here is how it may work.
  To give up the analytic-synthetic distinction as basic to the
understanding of language 1s to give up the idea that we can clearly
distinguish between theory and language. Meaning, as we might
loosely use the word, is contaminated by theory, by what is held to
be true. Feyerabend puts it this way:

Our argument against meaning invariance is simple and clear. It proceeds
from the fact that usually some of the principles involved in the determinations of the meanings of older theories or points of views are inconsistent
with the new ... theories. It points out that it is natural to resolve this
contradiction by eliminating the troublesome ... older principles, and to
replace them by principles, or theorems, of a new ... theory. And it

            *T. S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 134.
            * P. Strawson. The Bounds of Sense, 15.

=== p. 188 ===

concludes by showing that such a procedure will also lead to the elimination
of the old meanings.®

  We may now seem to have a formula for generating distinct
conceptual schemes. We get a new out of an old scheme when the
speakers of a language come to accept as true an important range of
sentences they previously took to be false (and, of course, vice
versa). We must not describe this change simply as a matter of their
coming to view old falsehoods as truths, for a truth is a proposition,
and what they come to accept, in accepting a sentence as true, is not
the same thing that they rejected when formerly they held the
sentence to be false. A change has come over the meaning of the
sentence because it now belongs to a new language.
  This picture of how new (perhaps better) schemes result from new
and better science is very much the picture philosophers of science,
like Putnam and Feyerabend, and historians of science, like Kuhn,
have painted for us. A related idea emerges in the suggestion of some
other philosophers, that we could improve our conceptual lot if we
were to tune our language to an improved science. Thus both Quine
and Smart, in somewhat different ways, regretfully admit that our
present ways of talking make a serious science of behaviour
impossible. (Wittgenstein and Ryle have said similar things without
regret.) The cure, Quine and Smart think, is to change how we talk.
Smart advocates (and predicts) the change in order to put us on the
scientifically straight path of materialism: Quine is more concerned
to clear the way for a purely extensional language. (Perhaps I should
add that I think our actual scheme and language are best understood
as extensional and materialist.)
  If we were to follow this advice, I do not myself think science or
understanding would be advanced, though possibly morals would.
But the present question is only whether, if such changes were to
take place, we should be justified in calling them alterations in the
basic conceptual apparatus. The difficulty 1n so calling them is easy
to appreciate. Suppose that in my office of Minister of Scientific
Language I want the new man to stop using words that refer, say, to
emotions, feelings, thoughts, and intentions, and to talk instead of
the physiological states and happenings that are assumed to be more
or less identical with the mental riff and raff. How do I tell whether
my advice has been heeded if the new man speaks a new language?

        ® P. Feyerabend, ‘Explanation, Reduction, and Empiricism’, 82.

=== p. 189 ===

For all I know, the shiny new phrases, though stolen from the old
language in which they refer to physiological stirrings, may in his
mouth play the role of the messy old mental concepts.
  The key phrase is: for all | know. What is clear is that retention of
some or all of the old vocabulary in itself provides no basis for
judging the new scheme to be the same as, or different from, the old.
So what sounded at first like a thrilling discovery—that truth is
relative to a conceptual scheme—has not so far been shown to be
anything more than the pedestrian and familiar fact that the truth of
a sentence is relative to (among other things) the language to which
it belongs. Instead of living in different worlds, Kuhn’s scientists
may, like those who need Webster’s dictionary, be only words apart.
  Giving up the analytic-synthetic distinction has not proven a help
in making sense of conceptual relativism. The analytic-synthetic
distinction is however explained in terms of something that may
serve to buttress conceptual relativism, namely the idea of empirical
content. The dualism of the synthetic and the analytic is a dualism of
sentences some of which are true (or false) both because of what they
mean and because of their empirical content, while others are true
(or false) by virtue of meaning alone, having no empirical content. If
we give up the dualism, we abandon the conception of meaning that
goes with it, but we do not have to abandon the idea of empirical
content: we can hold, if we want, that a// sentences have empirical
content. Empirical content is in turn explained by reference to the
facts, the world, experience, sensation, the totality of sensory
stimuli, or something similar. Meanings gave us a way to talk about
categories, the organizing structure of language, and so on; but 1t is
possible, as we have seen, to give up meanings and analyticity while
retaining the idea of language as embodying a conceptual scheme.
Thus in place of the dualism of the analytic-synthetic we get the
dualism of conceptual scheme and empirical content. The new
dualism is the foundation of an empiricism shorn of the untenable
dogmas of the analytic-synthetic distinction and reductionism—
shorn, that is, of the unworkable idea thgt we can uniquely allocate
empirical content sentence by sentence.
  I want to urge that this second dualism of scheme and content, of
organizing system and something waiting to be organized, cannot be
made intelligible and defensible. It is itself a dogma of empiricism,
the third dogma. The third, and perhaps the last, for if we give it up
it is not clear that there is anything distinctive left to call empiricism.

=== p. 190 ===

  The scheme-content dualism has been formulated in many ways.
Here are some examples. The first comes from Whorf, elaborating
on a theme of Sapir’s. Whorf says that:
... language produces an organization of experience. We are inclined to
think of language simply as a technique of expression, and not to realize that
language first of all is a classification and arrangement of the stream of
sensory experience which results in a certain world-order . . . In other words,
language does in a cruder but also in a broader and more versatile way the
same thing that science does .. . We are thus introduced to a new principle
of relativity, which holds that all observers are not led by the same physical
evidence to the same picture of the universe, unless their linguistic
backgrounds are similar, or can in some way be calibrated.’

Here we have all the required elements: language as the organizing
force,   not   to   be   distinguished clearly from       science;    what   is
organized, referred to variously as ‘experience’, ‘the stream of
sensory experience’, and ‘physical evidence’; and finally, the failure
of intertranslatability (‘calibration’). The failure of intertranslat-ability is a necessary condition for difference of conceptual schemes;
the common relation to experience or the evidence is what is
supposed to help us make sense of the claim that it is languages or
schemes that are under consideration when translation fails. It is
essential to this idea that there be something neutral and common
that lies outside all schemes. This common something cannot, of
course, be the subject matter of contrasting languages, or translation would be possible. Thus Kuhn has recently written:

Philosophers have now abandoned hope of finding a pure sense-datum
language ... but many of them continue to assume that theories can be
compared by recourse to a basic vocabulary consisting entirely of words
which are attached to nature in ways that are unproblematic and, to the
extent necessary, independent of theory . . . Feyerabend and I have argued
at length that no such vocabulary is available. In the transition from one
theory to the next words change their meanings or conditions of applicability in subtle ways. Though most of the same signs are used before and
after a revolution—e.g. force, mass, element, compound, cell—the way in
which some of them attach to nature has somehow changed. Successive
theories are thus, we say, incommensurable.®

‘Incommensurable’ is, of course, Kuhn and Feyerabend’s word for
‘not intertranslatable’. The neutral content waiting to be organized
is supplied by nature.

  " B. L. Whorf, 'The Punctual and Segmentative Aspects of Verbs in Hopi', 55.
  8 T. S. Kuhn, ‘Reflections on my Critics’, 266, 267.

=== p. 191 ===

  Feyerabend himself suggests that we may compare contrasting
schemes by ‘choosing a point of view outside the system or the
language’. He hopes we can do this because ‘there is still human
experience as an actually existing process’® independent of all
schemes.
  The same, or similar, thoughts are expressed by Quine in many
passages: “The totality of our so-called knowledge or beliefs . . . is
a man-made fabric which impinges on experience only along the
edges .. .’;'% .. total science is like a field of force whose boundary
conditions are experience’;'! ‘As an empiricist I ... think of the
conceptual scheme of science as a tool ... for predicting future
experience in the light of past experience.”'? And again:

We persist in breaking reality down somehow into a multiplicity of
identifiable and discriminable objects . .. We talk so inveterately of objects
that to say we do so seems almost to say nothing at all; for how else is there
to talk? It is hard to say how else there is to talk, not because our
objectifying pattern is an invariable trait of human nature, but because we
are bound to adapt any alien pattern to our own in the very process of
understanding or translating the alien sentences.'?

The test of difference remains failure or difficulty of translation: *. . .
to speak of that remote medium as radically different from ours is to
say no more than that the translations do not come smoothly.’'* Yet
the roughness may be so great that the alien has an ‘as yet
unimagined pattern beyond individuation’.!?
  The idea is then that something is a language, and associated with
a conceptual scheme, whether we can translate it or not, if 1t stands
in a certain relation (predicting, organizing, facing, or fitting)
experience (nature, reality, sensory promptings). The problem is to
say what the relation is, and to be clearer about the entities related.
  The images and metaphors fall into two main groups: conceptual
schemes (languages) either organize something, or they firit (asin ‘he
warps his scientific heritage to fit his . . . sensory promptings’'!®). The
first group contains also systematize, divide up (the stream of
experience); further examples of the second group are predict,
account for, face (the tribunal of experience). As for the entities that

      ° P. Feyerabend, ‘Problems of Empiricism’, 214.
      " W. V. Quine, ‘'Two Dogmas of Empiricism"’, 42.
      LU Ibd.                                           12 1bid.. 44.
      '* W._ V. Quine, ‘Speaking of Objects’, 1.        " 1bid., 25.
      % Ibid., 24.        1 W V. Quine, ‘Two Dogmas of Empiricism’. 46.

=== p. 192 ===

get organized, or which the scheme must fit, I think again we may
detect two main 1deas: either it 1s reality (the universe, the world,
nature), or it is experience (the passing show, surface irritations,
sensory promptings, sense-data, the given).
  We cannot attach-a clear meaning to the notion of organizing a
single object (the world, nature etc.) unless that object is understood
to contain or consist in other objects. Someone who sets out to
organize a closet arranges the things in it. If you are told not to
organize the shoes and shirts, but the closet itself, you would be
bewildered. How would you organize the Pacific Ocean? Straighten
out its shores, perhaps, or relocate its islands, or destroy its fish.
  A language may contain simple predicates whose extensions are
matched by no simple predicates, or even by any predicates at all, in
some other language. What enables us to make this point in
particular cases is an ontology common to the two languages, with
concepts that individuate the same objects. We can be clear about
breakdowns in translation when they are local enough, for a
background of generally successful translation provides what is
needed to make the failures intelligible. But we were after larger
game: we wanted to make sense of there being a language we could
not translate at all. Or, to put the point differently, we were looking
for a criterion of languagehood that did not depend on, or entall,
translatability into a familiar idiom. I suggest that the image of
organizing the closet of nature will not supply such a criterion.
  How about the other kind of object, experience? Can we think of
a language organizing it? Much the same difficulties recur. The
notion of organization applies only to pluralities. But whatever
plurality we take experience to consist in—events like losing a
button or stubbing a toe, having a sensation of warmth or hearing
an oboe—we will have to individuate according to familiar principles. A language that organizes such entities must be a language very
like our own.
  Experience (and its classmates like surface irritations, sensations,
and sense-data) also makes another and more obvious trouble for
the organizing idea. For how could something count as a language
that organized only experiences, sensations, surface irritations, or
sense-data? Surely knives and forks, railroads and mountains,
cabbages and kingdoms also need organizing.
  This last remark will no doubt sound inappropriate as a response
to the claim that a conceptual scheme is a way of coping with

=== p. 193 ===

sensory experience; and I agree that it is. But what was under
consideration was the idea of organizing experience, not the idea of
coping with (or fitting or facing) experience. The reply was apropos
of the former, not the latter, concept. So now let’s see whether we
can do better with the second idea.
  When we turn from talk of organization to talk of fitting we turn
our   attention    from      the   referential   apparatus   of language—
predicates, quantifiers, variables, and singular terms—to whole
sentences. It is sentences that predict (or are used to predict),
sentences that cope or deal with things, that fit our sensory
promptings, that can be compared or confronted with the evidence.
It is sentences also that face the tribunal of experience, though of
course they must face it together.
  The proposal is not that experiences, sense-data, surface irritations, or sensory promptings are the sole subject matter of
language. There is, it is true, the theory that talk about brick houses
on Elm Street 1s ultimately to be construed as being about sense data
or perceptions, but such reductionistic views are only extreme, and
implausible, versions of the general position we are considering. The
general position is that sensory experience provides all the evidence
for the acceptance of sentences (where sentences may include whole
theories).   A    sentence    or theory fits     our sensory promptings,
successfully faces the tribunal of experience, predicts future experience, or copes with the pattern of our surface irritations,
provided it is borne out by the evidence.
  In the common course of affairs, a theory may be borne out by the
available evidence and yet be false. But what is in view here is not
Just actually available evidence; it is the totality of possible sensory
evidence past, present, and future. We do not need to pause to
contemplate what this might mean. The point is that for a theory to
fit or face up to the totality of possible sensory evidence 1s for that
theory to be true. If a theory quantifies over physical objects,
numbers, or sets, what it says about these entities is true provided
the theory as a whole fits the sensory evidence. One can see how,
from this point of view, such entities might be called posits. It is
reasonable to call something a posit if it can be contrasted with
something that is not. Here the something that i1s not is sensory
experience—at least that is the idea.
  The trouble is that the notion of fitting the totality of experience,
like the notion of fitting the facts, or of being true to the facts, adds

=== p. 194 ===

nothing intelligible to the simple concept of being true. To speak of
sensory experience rather than the evidence, or just the facts,
expresses a view about the source or nature of evidence, but it does
not add a new entity to the universe against which to test conceptual
schemes. The totality of sensory evidence is what we want provided
it is all the evidence there is; and all the evidence there is is just what
it takes to make our sentences or theories true. Nothing, however,
no thing, makes sentences and theories true: not experience, not
surface irritations, not the world, can make a sentence true. That
experience takes a certain course, that our skin is warmed or
punctured, that the universe is finite, these facts, if we like to talk
that way, make sentences and theories true. But this point is put
better without mention of facts. The sentence ‘My           skin is warm’ is
true if and only if my skin is warm. Here there is no reference to a
fact, a world, an experience, or a piece of evidence.!’
  Our attempt to characterize languages or conceptual schemes in
terms of the notion of fitting some entity has come down, then, to
the simple thought that something is an acceptable conceptual
scheme or theory if it is true. Perhaps we better say largely true in
order to allow sharers of a scheme to differ on details. And the
criterion of a conceptual scheme different from our own now
becomes: largely true but not translatable. The question whether
this is a useful criterion is just the question how well we understand
the notion of truth, as applied to language, independent of the
notion of translation. The answer is, 1 think, that we do not
understand it independently at all.
  We recognize sentences like * “Snow is white’ is true if and only if
snow is white’ to be trivially true. Yet the totality of such English
sentences uniquely determines the extension of the concept of truth
for English. Tarski generalized this observation and made it a test of
theories of truth: according to Tarski’s Convention T, a satisfactory
theory of truth for a language L must entail, for every sentence s of
L, a theorem of the form ‘s is true if and only if p° where ‘s’ 1s
replaced by a description ofs and "p’ by s itself
                                               if L is English, and by
a translation of s into English if L is not English.'® This isn’t, of
course, a definition of truth, and it doesn’t hint that there is a single
definition or theory that applies to languages generally. Nevertheless,
Convention T suggests, though it cannot state, an important feature
         17 See Essay 3.
         '® A. Tarski, ‘The Concept of Truth in Formalized Languages'.

=== p. 195 ===

common to all the specialized concepts of truth. It succeeds in doing
this by making essential use of the notion of translation into a
language we know. Since Convention T embodies our best intuition
as to how the concept of truth is used, there does not seem to be
much hope for a test that a conceptual scheme is radically different
from ours if that test depends on the assumption that we can dxvorce
the notion of truth from that of translation.
  Neither a fixed stock of meanings, nor a theory-neutral reality,
can provide, then, a ground for comparison of conceptual schemes.
It would be a mistake to look further for such a ground if by that we
mean   something    conceived   as    common       to   incommensurable
schemes. In abandoning this search, we abandon the attempt to
make sense of the metaphor of a single space within which each
scheme has a position and provides a point of view.
  I turn now to the more modest approach: the idea of partial
rather than total failure of translation. This introduces the possibility of making changes and contrasts in conceptual schemes
intelligible by reference to the common part. What we need 1s a
theory of translation or interpretation that makes no assumptions
about shared meanings, concepts, or beliefs.
  The interdependence of belief and meaning springs from the
interdependence of two aspects of the interpretation of speech
behaviour: the attribution of beliefs and the interpretation of
sentences. We remarked before that we can afford to associate
conceptual schemes with languages because of these dependencies.
Now we can put the point in a somewhat sharper way. Allow that a
man’s speech cannot be interpreted except by someone who knows a
good deal about what the speaker believes (and intends and wants),
and that fine distinctions between beliefs are impossible without
understood   speech;   how   then    are we   to   interpret   speech    or
intelligibly to attribute beliefs and other attitudes? Clearly we must
have a theory that simultaneously accounts for attitudes and
interprets speech, and which assumes neither.
  I suggest, following Quine, that we may without circularity or
unwarranted assumptions accept certain very general attitudes
towards sentences as the basic evidence for a theory of radical
interpretation. For the sake of the present discussion at least we may
depend on the attitude of accepting as true, directed to sentences, as
the crucial notion. (A more full-blooded theory would look to other
attitudes towards sentences as well, such as wishing true, wondering

=== p. 196 ===

whether true, intending to make true, and so on.) Attitudes are
indeed involved here, but the fact that the main issue is not begged
can be seen from this: if we merely know that someone holds a
certain sentence to be true, we know neither what he means by the
sentence nor what belief his holding it true represents. His holding
the sentence true is thus the vector of two forces: the problem of
interpretation is to abstract from the evidence a workable theory of
meaning and an acceptable theory of belief.
  The way this problem is solved is best appreciated from undramatic examples.     If you   see a ketch sailing     by and    your
companion says, ‘Look at that handsome yawl’, you may be faced
with a problem of interpretation. One natural possibility is that your
friend has mistaken a ketch for a yawl, and has formed a false belief.
But if his vision is good and his line of sight favourable it is even
more plausible that he does not use the word ‘yawl’ quite as you do,
and has made no mistake at all about the position of the jigger on
the passing yacht. We do this sort of off the cuff interpretation all
the time, deciding in favour of reinterpretation of words in order to
preserve a reasonable theory of belief. As philosophers we are
peculiarly tolerant of systematic malapropism, and practised at
interpreting the result. The process is that of constructing a viable
theory of belief and meaning from sentences held true.
  Such examples emphasize the interpretation of anomalous details
against a background of common beliefs and a going method of
translation. But the principles involved must be the same in less
trivial cases. What matters is this: if all we know is what sentences a
speaker holds true, and we cannot assume that his language is our
own, then we cannot take even a first step towards interpretation
without knowing or assuming a great deal about the speaker’s
beliefs. Since knowledge of beliefs comes only with the ability to
interpret words, the only possibility at the start is to assume general
agreement on beliefs. We get a first approximation to a finished
theory by assigning to sentences of a speaker conditions of truth that
actually obtain (in our own opinion) just when the speaker holds
those sentences true. The guiding policy is to do this as far as
possible, subject to considerations of simplicity, hunches about the
effects of social conditioning, and of course our common-sense, or
scientific, knowledge of explicable error.
  The method is not designed to eliminate disagreement, nor can it;
its purpose is to make meaningful disagreement possible, and this

=== p. 197 ===

depends entirely on a foundation—some foundation—in agreement.
The agreement may take the form of widespread sharing of
sentences held true by speakers of ‘the same language’, or agreement
in the large mediated by a theory of truth contrived by an interpreter
for speakers of another language.
  Since charity is not an option, but a condition of having a
workable theory, it is meaningless to suggest that we might fall into
massive error by endorsing it. Until we have successfully established
a systematic correlation of sentences held true with sentences held
true, there are no mistakes to make. Charity 1s forced on us; whether
we like it or not, if we want to understand others, we must count
them right in most matters. If we can produce a theory that reconciles
charity and the formal conditions for a theory, we have done all that
could be done to ensure communication. Nothing more is possible,
and nothing more is needed.
  We make maximum sense of the words and thoughts of others
when we interpret in a way that optimizes agreement (this includes
room, as we said, for explicable error, i.e. differences of opinion).
Where does this leave the case for conceptual relativism? The answer
is, I think, that we must say much the same thing about differences in
conceptual scheme as we say about differences in belief: we improve
the clarity and bite of declarations of difference, whether of scheme
or opinion, by enlarging the basis of shared (translatable) language
or of shared opinion. Indeed, no clear line between the cases can be
made out. If we choose to translate some alien sentence rejected by
its speakers by a sentence to which we are strongly attached on a
community basis, we may be tempted to call this a difference in
schemes; if we decide to accommodate the evidence in other ways, it
may be more natural to speak of a difference of opinion. But when
others think differently from us, no general principle, or appeal to
evidence, can force us to decide that the difference lies in our beliefs
rather than in our concepts.
  We must conclude, I think, that the attempt to give a solid
meaning to the idea of conceptual relativism, and hence to the idea
of a conceptual scheme, fares no better when based on partial failure
of translation than when based on total failure. Given the underlying methodology of interpretation, we could not be in a position to
judge that others had concepts or beliefs radically different from our
own,

  It would be wrong to summarize by saying we have shown how

=== p. 198 ===

communication is possible between people who have different
schemes, a way that works without need of what there cannot be,
namely a neutral ground, or a common co-ordinate system. For we
have found no intelligible basis on which it can be said that schemes
are different. It would be equally wrong to announce the glorious
news that all mankind—all speakers of language, at least—share a
common scheme and ontology. For if we cannot intelligibly say that
schemes are different, neither can we intelligibly say that they are
one.

  In giving up dependence on the concept of an uninterpreted
reality, something outside all schemes and science, we do not
relinquish the notion of objective truth—quite the contrary. Given
the dogma of a dualism of scheme and reality, we get conceptual
relativity, and truth relative to a scheme. Without the dogma, this
kind of relativity goes by the board. Of course truth of sentences
remains relative to language, but that is as objective as can be. In
giving up the dualism of scheme and world, we do not give up the
world, but re-establish unmediated touch with the familiar objects
whose antics make our sentences and opinions true or false.

