=== chunk: davidson-1984-inquiries/introduction ===
title: Introduction
source_pdf: docs/sources/davidson-1984-inquiries/full.ocr.pdf
pdf_pages: 16-23
page_scheme: pdf
plan_page_start: 16
plan_page_end: 23
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 16 ===

Introduction

What is it for words to mean what they do? In the essays collected
here I explore the idea that we would have an answer to this question
if we knew how to construct a theory satisfying two demands: it
would   provide an interpretation of all utterances, actual and
potential, of a speaker or group of speakers; and it would be
verifiable without knowledge of the detailed propositional attitudes
of the speaker. The first condition acknowledges the holistic nature
of linguistic understanding. The second condition aims to prevent
smuggling into the foundations of the theory concepts too closely
allied to the concept of meaning. A theory that does not satisfy both
conditions cannot be said to answer our opening question in a
philosophically instructive way.
  The first five essays are mainly concerned with the question what
sort of a theory would satisfy the first condition.
  Essay 1, ‘Theories of Meaning and Learnable Languages’, urges
that a satisfactory theory must discover a finite basic vocabulary in
the verbal phenomena to be interpreted if it is to prove useful to a
creature with finite powers. If this is so, there is no escape from the
need to treat the semantic features of the potential infinity of
sentences as owed to the semantic features of the items in a finite
vocabulary. It turns out that a number of familiar theories fail to
meet this condition: Frege’s analysis of oblique contexts, Church’s
logic of sense   and   denotation, Tarski’s informal     treatment of
quotation are examples. Standard theories of adverbial modification
might well be added to the list.
  Essay 2, ‘Truth and Meaning’, argues that a theory of truth along
the lines of Tarski’s truth definitions, but modified in various ways
to apply to a natural language, would be enough for an interpreter

=== p. 17 ===

xiv   Introduction

to go on. Such theories have clear virtues. They make no use of
meanings as entities; no objects are introduced to correspond to
predicates or sentences; and from a finite set of axioms it is possible
to prove, for each sentence of the language to be interpreted, a
theorem that states truth conditions for that sentence. Further, the
proof of such a theorem amounts to an analysis of how the truth or
falsity of the sentence depends on how it is composed from elements
drawn from the basic vocabulary. If such theories really do satisfy
the two conditions listed in the first paragraph, we can take the word
‘theory’ in ‘theory of meaning’ seriously.
  Many objections have been made to the claim that truth theories
can do duty as theories of meaning. Some of the objections I have
tried to meet or deflect in other essays in this book. But whether or
not the claim can be made good, some of the arguments for it in
“Truth and Meaning’ are faulty. The reader will find that I shifted
ground more than once as I tried to improve or clarify this central
thesis. One thing that only gradually dawned on me was that while
Tarski intended to analyse the concept of truth by appealing (in
Convention T) to the concept of meaning (in the guise of sameness
of meaning, or translation), I have the reverse in mind. I considered
truth to be the central primitive concept, and hoped, by detailing
truth’s structure, to get at meaning. These are remarks about
theories of truth, of course, not remarks to be found in them.
  Something else that was slow coming to me was that since I was
treating theories of truth as empirical theories, the axioms and
theorems had to be viewed as laws. So a theorem like ‘“‘Schnee ist
weiss’ is true in the mouth of a German speaker if and only if snow
is white’ has to be taken not merely as true, but as capable of
supporting counterfactual claims. Indeed, given that the evidence
for this law, if it is one, depends ultimately on certain causal
relations between speakers and the world, one can say that it is no
accident that *‘Schnee ist weiss’ is true if and only if snow is white; it
is the whiteness of snow that makes ‘Schnee ist weiss’ true. How
much of a concession this is to intensionality depends, | suppose, on
one’s analysis of the concept of law. What seems clear is that
whatever the concession comes to, it is one that must be made for
any empirical science. These matters are discussed in Essay 12.
  Essay 3, ‘True to the Facts’, asks whether a theory of truth in
Tarski’s style should    be called a correspondence theory. Such
theories do not, like most correspondence theories, explain truth by

=== p. 18 ===

                                                       Introduction    xv

finding entities such as facts for true sentences to correspond to. And
there are good reasons, which can be traced back to Frege, for
rejecting facts as entities that could play this role. On the other hand,
theories of truth of the kind considered here do require that a
relation between entities and expressions be characterized (‘satisfaction’). It is not easy to see how a satisfactory route to truth can
escape this step if the language the theory treats has the usual
quantificational resources.
  ‘Semantics for Natural Languages’, Essay 4, urges that truth
theories could provide a formal semantics for natural languages to
match the sort of formal syntax linguists from Chomsky on have
favoured. When this essay was written, the deep structures of syntax
were thought to be the vehicles for semantic interpretation. Essay 4
suggested that the deep structure of a sentence should correspond to
the logical form a theory of truth assigned to that sentence.
  Tarski’s Convention T, which is defended in Essay 5, is an
informal, but powerful, instrument for testing theories of truth
against one’s prior grasp of the concept. In the most direct
application, the test merely calls on us to recognize the disquo-tational feature of truth predicates; sentences like ‘““Snow is white”
is true in English if and only if snow is white’ are trivially true. Since
the totality of such sentences uniquely determines the extension of a
truth predicate for English, a theory that entails all such sentences
must be extensionally correct. Critics have often made the error of
thinking that since the theorems that show a theory to be correct are
trivial, the theory or the concept of truth it characterizes, must also
be trivial.
  A theory of truth would serve to interpret a speaker only if the
theory were up to accounting for all the linguistic resources of the
speaker. But is a theory that satisfies Convention T adequate to a
natural language? Here there are two questions. One is what devices
to make or consider available in the language of the theory; the
other is how to apply these devices to the language of the speaker.
My working assumption has been that nothing more than standard
first-order quantification theory is available. Indeed, 1 was long
convinced that many alternative approaches to semantics, employing, for example, modal logics, possible world semantics, or
substitutional quantification, could not be accommodated in a
theory that met the demands of Convention T. I now know this was
hasty. Convention T does not settle as much as I thought, and more

=== p. 19 ===

xvi   Introduction

possibilities for interesting theorizing are open than I had realized.
The well-known virtues of first-order quantification theory still
provide plenty of motivation, however, to see how much we can do
with it. In the next three essays, collected under the head of
application, I attempt the semantic taming of three related but
recalcitrant idioms: quotation, indirect discourse, and mood
operators.
  Essay 6 points out that no current theory of quotation is entirely
satisfactory, and it proposes an explicitly demonstrative approach
which makes quotation a special case of the demonstrative reference
of words to other words in the verbal neighbourhood.
  Essay 7, ‘On Saying That’, concentrates on one of the many kinds
of sentence used to attribute attitudes; the paratactic solution
suggested has obvious affinities with the treatment of quotation in
Essay 6. In Essay 3 there are hints (which I think could be developed)
on how the analysis could be extended to belief sentences. If the
strategy were to be pursued, it might serve to give a semantics
(though not a logic) for the modalities, for counterfactuals, and
further sentences about ‘propositional’ attitudes.
  Essay 8, ‘Moods and Performances’, stresses the often neglected
distinction between grammatical moods on the one hand and
various sorts of illocutionary force on the other. Only the first is of
concern to a theory of what words mean. Here a paratactic analysis
of imperatives is suggested which is intended to accommodate our
natural feeling that imperatives don’t have a truth value while
remaining within the resources of a theory of truth.
  In the companion volume to this one, Essays on Actions and
Events, 1 show how a theory of truth can be applied to a number of
further problem cases: sentences about actions and other events,
adverbial modification, and singular causal statements.
  The third section of the present book is addressed to the question
whether a theory of truth for a speaker can be verified without
assuming too much of what it sets out to describe.
  In ‘Radical Interpretation’, Essay 9, as in the rest of the essays, 1
follow Quine in supposing that even if we narrow attention to verbal
behaviour that reveals when, and under what conditions, a speaker
gives credence to a sentence, there is no direct way of sorting out the
roles of belief and meaning in explaining that credence. Eliciting
separate accounts of belief and meaning requires a theory that can
bring to bear on the interpretation of each sentence and its

=== p. 20 ===

                                                     Introduction    xvii

accompanying attitudes the contribution of further data. Only by
studying the pattern of assents to sentences can we decide what is
meant and what believed.
  Depending on evidence which, without the aid of theory, makes
no distinction between the contributions of belief and meaning to
linguistic behaviour, requires a method for effecting the separation
to a degree sufficient for communication. Devices to this end are
described and defended in the present essays. But all of them, in one
way or another, rely on the Principle of Charity.
  The phrase and the basic idea come from Neil Wilson, ‘Substances
Without Substrata’. Quine puts it this way: *. .. assertions startlingly false on the face of them are likely to turn on hidden differences
of language’ (Word and Object, p. 59). Quine applies the principle
primarily to the interpretation of the logical constants.
  Because I find I cannot use Quine’s notion of stimulus meaning as
a basis for interpreting certain sentences, I apply the Principle of
Charity across the board. So applied, it counsels us quite generally
to prefer theories of interpretation that minimize disagreement. So |
tended to put the matter in the early essays, wanting to stress the
inevitability of the appeal to charity. But minimizing disagreement,
or maximizing agreement, is a confused ideal. The aim of interpretation is not agreement but understanding. My point has always
been that understanding can be secured only by interpreting in a way
that makes for the right sort of agreement. The ‘right sort’. however,
is no easier to specify than to say what constitutes a good reason for
holding a particular belief.
  The subtle pressures on the Principle of Charity begin to emerge in
Essays 10 and I1. Yet here too there are only hints; in work now in
progress I attempt to develop the subject in more detalil.
  Essay 10, ‘Belief and the Basis of Meaning’, insists on the
symmetry    of belief and      meaning in   the exploration of verbal
behaviour. In one important respect it goes further. It develops a
striking parallel between Bayesian theories of decision and theories
of meaning, and gives reasons why the two theories should be
considered mutually dependent. The hints dropped here, which give
promise of a unified theory of speech and action, have been taken up
in my Carus Lectures, and will be published presently.
  The first two essays on radical interpretation stress the fact that
understanding the words of
                         a speaker requires knowing much about
what he believes. Essay 11, ‘Thought and Talk’, attends to the

=== p. 21 ===

xvilli   Introduction

reciprocal dependence, and concludes, rather speculatively, that
only a creature with a language can properly be said to have a full-fledged scheme of propositional attitudes.
   Essay 12, ‘Reply to Foster’, as remarked above, recognizes that if
a theory oftruth is to suffice for interpretation, it must be more than
true: its axioms and theorems must be natural laws. If an interpreter
knew such a theory, he could use it to understand a speaker, but only
if he knew that the theory’s pronouncements were nomic.
  The next four essays may be described as philosophical fallout from the approach to truth and interpretation recommended
here.
  A theory of truth can be called a correspondence theory in the
unassuming sense of Essay 3, but that sense does not encourage the
thought that we understand what it would be like to compare
sentences with what they are about, since the theory provides no
entities with which to compare sentences. Along related lines, Essay
13, ‘On    the Very Idea of a Conceptual Scheme’,            scouts the
intelligibility of claims   that different languages     or conceptual
schemes ‘divide up’ or ‘cope with’ reality in importantly different
ways. Our general method of interpretation forestalls the possibility
of discovering that others have        radically different intellectual
equipment. But more important, it is argued that if we reject the idea
of an uninterpreted source of evidence no room is left for a dualism
of scheme and content. Without such a dualism we cannot make
sense of conceptual relativism. This does not mean that we must give
up the idea of an objective world independent of our knowledge of
it. The argument against conceptual relativism shows rather that
language is not a screen or filter through which our knowledge of the
world must pass.
  Giving up the dualism of scheme and content amounts to
abandoning a theme central to empiricism in its main historical
manifestations. But I do not think, as friends and critics have
variously suggested, that my argument against empiricism makes
me, or ought to make me, a pragmatist, a transcendental idealist, or
an ‘internal’ realist. All these positions are forms of relativism that I
find as hard to understand as the empiricisms I attack.
  According to Essay 13, no sense can be made of the idea that the
conceptual resources of different languages differ dramatically. The
argument that makes for this conclusion makes equally for the
conclusion that the general outlines of our view of the world are

=== p. 22 ===

                                                    Introduction   xix

correct; we individually and communally may go plenty wrong, but
only on condition that in most large respects we are right. It follows
that when we study what our language—any language—requires in
the way of overall ontology, we are not just making a tour of our
own picture of things: what we take there to be is pretty much what
there 1s. This is the theme of Essay 14, ‘The Method of Truth in
Metaphysics’.
  A theory of truth is tested by theorems that state the conditions
under which sentences are true; these theorems say nothing about
reference.   Essay   15,   ‘Reality Without   Reference’,   accordingly
contends that how a theory of truth maps non-sentential expressions
on to objects is a matter of indifference as long as the conditions of
truth are not affected. The question what objects a particular
sentence is about, like the questions what object a term refers to, or
what objects a predicate is true of, has no answer.
  In Essay 15 I am with Quine in holding reference to be inscrutable.
Essay 16, ‘The Inscrutability of Reference’, warns against taking
inscrutability as a reason for trying somehow to relativize the
reference and ontology of singular terms and predicates. For since
nothing can reveal how a speaker’s words have been mapped on to
objects, there is nothing to relativize to; and interpretation being
unaffected, there is no need to relativize.
  No discussion of theories of meaning can fail to take account of
the limits of application of such theories. The scope must be broad
enough to provide an insight into how language can serve our
endless purposes, but restricted enough to be amenable to serious
systematization. Essay 8 took a necessary step by distinguishing
between grammatical mood, which the meanest theory must account
for, and the force of utterances, which is beyond the reach of
comparable regimentation. Essay 17, ‘What Metaphors Mean’, is
mainly devoted to the thesis that we explain what words in metaphor
do only by supposing they have the same meanings they do in non-figurative contexts. We lose our ability to account for metaphor, as
well as   rule   out all hope   of responsible theory, if we posit
metaphorical meanings.
  Essay 18,      ‘Communication and Convention’, draws another
boundary. It 15 always an open question how well the theory an
interpreter brings to a linguistic encounter will cope. In practice an
interpreter keeps the conversation going by adjusting his theory on
the spot. The principles of such inventive accommodation are not

=== p. 23 ===

xx     Introduction

themselves reducible to theory, involving as they do nothing less
than all our skills at theory construction.

     The essays have been     retouched in     minor ways to reduce
repetition, to eliminate unnecessary or confused passages, or to
bring early more into line with later thoughts. These temperings
have been limited to the trivial. Where my errors or lapses have
earned attention I have let things stand, or marked the change with a
footnote.
  Many more people have helped me than I can possibly thank here,
but I do especially want to mention Paul Grice, Gilbert Harman,
Saul Kripke, David Lewis, Richard Rorty, Sir Peter Strawson, and
Bruce Vermazen. Sue Larson and Akeel Bilgrami did indispensable
work on the footnotes, bibliography, and index. Much more than
that, they gave me philosophical advice and moral support. Sue
Larson has taught me much about philosophy of language; her
influence is especially strong in Essays 8 and 18.
     In 1970 I gave the John Locke lectures at Oxford. The contents of
those lectures turn up here (much modified) in Essays 2, 3, 6, 7, and
13. A further lecture on adverbial modification drew on material
now printed in Essays 6—11 of Essays on Actions and Events.
     An early influence on my thinking was Michael Dummett, who
lectured on Frege and philosophy of language several times at
Stanford University while I was there in the fifties. Our discussions
took a public form in 1974 when we gave a joint seminar on truth
while I was a visiting fellow at All Souls College.
     Over the years John Wallace and 1 talked endlessly about the
issues raised in this book. He early appreciated the power of Tarski’s
work on truth, and much that I have written reflects his insight and
sympathetic criticism.
     W. V. Quine was my teacher at a crucial stage in my life. He not
only started me thinking about language, but he was the first to give
me the idea that there is such a thing as being right, or at least
wrong, in philosophy, and that it matters which. Without the
inspiration of his writing, his patient tutelage, his friendly wit and his
generous encouragement, this book would not be worse than it is. It
would not be.

