=== chunk: davidson-1984-inquiries/radical-interpretation ===
title: Radical Interpretation (Essay 9)
source_pdf: docs/sources/davidson-1984-inquiries/full.ocr.pdf
pdf_pages: 148-163
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 125
plan_page_end: 140
extracted_pages: 15 (plan nominally 16; trailing blank trimmed)
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 125 ===

Kurt utters the words ‘Es regnet’ and under the right conditions we
know that he has said that it is raining. Having identified his
utterance as intentional and linguistic, we are able to go on to
interpret his words: we can say what his words, on that occasion,
meant. What could we know that would enable us to do this? How
could we come to know it? The first of these questions is not the
same as the question what we do know that enables us to interpret
the words of others. For there may easily be something we could
know and don’t, knowledge of which would suffice for interpretation, while on the other hand it is not altogether obvious that there
is anything we actually know which plays an essential role in
interpretation. The second question, how we could come to have
knowledge that would serve to yield interpretations, does not, of
course, concern the actual history of language acquisition. It is thus
a doubly hypothetical question: given a theory that would make
interpretation possible,   what evidence plausibly available      to   a
potential interpreter would support the theory to a reasonable
degree? In what follows I shall try to sharpen these questions and
suggest answers.

  The problem of interpretation is domestic as well as foreign: it
surfaces for speakers of the same language in the form of the
question, how can it be determined that the language is the same?
Speakers of the same language can go on the assumption that for
them the same expressions are to be interpreted in the same way, but
this does not indicate what justifies the assumption. All understanding of the speech of another involves radical interpretation. But it
will help keep assumptions from going unnoticed to focus on cases

=== p. 126 ===

where interpretation is most clearly called for: interpretation in one
idiom of talk in another.?
   What knowledge would serve for interpretation? A short answer
would be, knowledge of what each meaningful expression means. In
German, those words Kurt spoke mean that it is raining and Kurt
was speaking German. So in uttering the words ‘Es regnet’, Kurt
said that it was raining. This reply does not, as might first be
thought, merely restate the problem. For it suggests that in passing
from a description that does not interpret (his uttering of the words
‘Es regnet’) to interpreting description (his saying that it is raining)
we must introduce a machinery of words and expressions (which
may or may not be exemplified in actual utterances), and this
suggestion is important. But the reply is no further help, for it does
not say what it is to know what an expression means.
   There is indeed also the hint that corresponding to each meaningful expression that is an entity, its meaning. This idea, even if not
wrong, has proven to be very little help: at best it hypostasizes the
problem.
   Disenchantment with meanings as implementing a viable account
of communication or interpretation helps explain why some philosophers have tried to get along without, not only meanings, but any
serious theory at all. It is tempting, when the concepts we summon
up to try to explain interpretation turn out to be more baffling than
the explanandum, to reflect that after all verbal communication
consists in nothing more than elaborate disturbances in the air
which form a causal link between the non-linguistic activities of
human agents. But although interpretable speeches are nothing but
(that 1s, identical with) actions performed with assorted non-linguistic intentions (to warn, control, amuse, distract, insult), and
these actions are in turn nothing but (identical with) intentional
movements of the lips and larynx, this observation takes us no
distance towards an intelligible general account of what we might
know that would allow us to redescribe uninterpreted utterances as
the right interpreted ones.
   Appeal to meanings leaves us stranded further than we started
from the non-linguistic goings-on that must supply the evidential

  ! The term ‘radical interpretation’ is meant to suggest strong kinship with Quine’s
‘radical translation’. Kinship is not identity, however, and ‘interpretation” in place of
‘translation’ marks one of the differences: a greater emphasis on the explicitly
semantical in the former.

=== p. 127 ===

base for interpretation; the ‘nothing but’ attitude provides no clue as
to how the evidence is related to what it surely is evident for.
  Other proposals for bridging the gap fall short in various ways.
The ‘causal’ theories of Ogden and Richards and of Charles Morris
attempted to analyse the meaning of sentences, taken one at a time,
on the basis of behaviouristic data. Even if these theories had
worked for the simplest sentences (which they clearly did not), they
did not touch the problem of extending the method to sentences of
greater complexity and abstractness. Theories of another kind start
by trying to connect words rather than sentences with non-linguistic
facts. This is promising because words are finite in number while
sentences are not, and yet each sentence i1s no more than a
concatenation of words: this offers the chance of a theory that
interprets each of an infinity of sentences using only finite resources.
But such theories fail to reach the evidence, for it seems clear that the
semantic features of words cannot be explained directly on the basis
of non-linguistic phenomena. The reason is simple. The phenomena
to which we must turn are the extra-linguistic interests and activities
that language serves, and these are served by words only in so far as
the words are incorporated in (or on occasion happen to be)
sentences. But then there is no chance of giving a foundational
account of words before giving one of sentences.
  For quite different reasons, radical interpretation cannot hope to
take as evidence for the meaning of a sentence an account of the
complex and delicately discriminated intentions with which the
sentence is typically uttered. It is not easy to see how such an
approach can deal with the structural, recursive feature of language
that is essential to explaining how new sentences can be understood.
But the central difficulty is that we cannot hope to attach a sense to
the attribution of finely discriminated intentions independently of
interpreting speech. The reason is not that we cannot ask necessary
questions, but that interpreting an agent’s intentions, his beliefs and
his words are parts of a single project, no part of which can be
assumed to be complete before the rest is. If this is right, we cannot
make the full panoply of intentions and beliefs the evidential base
for a theory of radical interpretation.
  We are now in a position to say something more about what
would serve to make interpretation possible. The interpreter must be
able to understand any of the infinity of sentences the speaker might
utter. If we are to state explicitly what the interpreter might know

=== p. 128 ===

that would enable him to do this, we must put it in finite form.2 If
this requirement is to be met, any hope of a universal method of
interpretation must be abandoned. The most that can be expected is
to explain how an interpreter could interpret the utterances of
speakers of a single language (or a finite number of languages): it
makes no sense to ask for a theory that would yield an explicit
interpretation for any utterance in any (possible) language.
  It is still not clear, of course, what it is for a theory to yield an
explicit interpretation of an utterance. The formulation of the
problem seems to invite us to think of the theory as the specification
of a function taking utterances as arguments and having interpretations as values. But then interpretations would be no better than
meanings and just as surely entities of some mysterious kind. So it
seems wise to describe what is wanted of the theory without
apparent reference to meanings or interpretations: someone who
knows the theory can interpret the utterances to which the theory
applies.
  The second general requirement on a theory of interpretation is
that it can be supported or verified by evidence plausibly available
to an interpreter. Since the theory is general—it must apply to a
potential infinity of utterances—it would be natural to think of
evidence in its behalf as instances of particular interpretations
recognized as correct. And this case does, of course, arise for the
interpreter dealing with a language he already knows. The speaker
of a language normally cannot produce an explicit finite theory for
his own language, but he can test a proposed theory since he can tell
whether it yields correct interpretations when applied to particular
utterances.                                                '
  In radical interpretation, however, the theory is supposed to
supply an understanding of particular utterances that is not given in
advance, so the ultimate evidence for the theory cannot be correct
sample interpretations. To deal with the general case, the evidence
must be of a sort that would be available to someone who does not
already know how to interpret utterances the theory is designed to
cover: it must be evidence that can be stated without essential use of
such linguistic concepts as meaning, interpretation, synonymy, and
the like.
  Before saying what kind of theory I think will do the trick, I want

                            ? See Essay .

=== p. 129 ===

to discuss a last alternative suggestion, namely that a method of
translation, from the language to be interpreted into the language of
the interpreter, is all the theory that is needed. Such a theory would
consist in the statement of an effective method for going from an
arbitrary sentence of the alien tongue to a sentence of a familiar
language; thus it would satisfy the demand for a finitely stated
method applicable to any sentence. But I do not think a translation
manual is the best form for a theory of interpretation to take.?
   When interpretation is our aim, a method of translation deals
with a wrong topic, a relation between two languages, where what is
wanted is an interpretation of one (in another, of course, but that
goes without saying since any theory is in some language). We
cannot without confusion count the language used in stating the
theory as part of the subject matter of the theory unless we explicitly
make it so. In the general case, a theory of translation involves three
languages: the object language, the subject language, and the
metalanguage (the languages from and into which translation
proceeds,      and    the   language      of the      theory,    which      says   what
expressions of the subject language translate which expressions of
the object language). And in this general case, we can know which
sentences of the subject language translate which sentences of the
object language without knowing what any of the sentences of either
language mean (in any sense, anyway, that would let someone who
understood the theory interpret sentences of the object language). If
the subject language happens to be identical with the language of the
theory, then someone who understands the theory can no doubt use
the translation manual to interpret alien utterances; but this is
because he brings to bear two things he knows and that the theory
does not state: the fact that the subject language is his own, and his
knowledge of how to interpet utterances in his own language.
   It is awkward to try to make explicit the assumption that a
mentioned sentence belongs to one’s own language. We could try,
for example, ‘“Es regnet” in Kurt’s language is translated as ‘It is
raining” in mine’, but the indexical self-reference is out of place in a
theory that ought to work for any interpreter. If we decide to accept

  ? The idea of a translation manual with appropriate empirical constraints as a device
_for studying problems in the philosophy of language is, of course, Quine’s. This idea
inspired much of my thinking on the present subject, and my proposal is in important
respects very close to Quine's. Since Quine did not intend to answer the questions [ have
set, the claim that the method of translation is not adequate as a solution to the problem
of radical interpretation is not a criticism of any doctrine of Quine’s.

=== p. 130 ===

this difficulty, there remains the fact that the method of translation
leaves tacit and beyond the reach of theory what we need to know
that allows us to interpret our own language. A theory of translation
must read some sort of structure into sentences, but there is no
reason to expect that it will provide any insight into how the
meanings of sentences depend on their structure.
  A satisfactory theory for interpreting the utterances of a language,
our own included, will reveal significant semantic structure: the
interpretation of utterances of complex sentences will systematically
depend on the interpretation of utterances of simpler sentences, for
example. Suppose we were to add to a theory of translation a
satisfactory theory ofinterpretation for our own language. Then we
would have exactly what we want, but in an unnecessarily bulky
form. The translation manual churns out, for each sentence of the
language to be translated, a sentence of the translator’s language;
the theory of interpretation then gives the interpretation of these
familiar sentences. Clearly the reference to the home language is
superfluous; it is an unneeded intermediary between interpretation
and alien idiom. The only expressions a theory of interpretation has
to mention are those belonging to the language to be interpreted.
  A theory of interpretation for an object language may then be
viewed as the result of the merger of a structurally revealing theory
of interpretation for a known language, and a system of translation
from the unknown language into the known. The merger makes all
reference to the known language otiose; when this reference is
dropped, what is left is a structurally revealing theory of interpretation for the object language—couched, of course, in familiar
words. We have such theories, 1 suggest, in theories of truth of the
kind Tarski first showed how to give.*
  What characterizes a theory of truth in Tarski’s style is that it
entails, for every sentence s of the object language, a sentence of the
form:

  s is true (in the object language) if and only if p.

Instances of the form (which we shall call T-sentences) are obtained
by replacing ‘s’ by a canonical description of s, and p’ by a
translation of s. The important undefined semantical notion in the
theory is that of satisfaction which relates sentences, open or closed,

          * A. Tarski, ‘The Concept of Truth in Formalized Languages'.

=== p. 131 ===

to infinite sequences of objects, which may be taken to belong to the
range of the variables of the object language. The axioms, which are
finite in number, are of two kinds: some give the conditions under
which a sequence satisfies a complex sentence on the basis of the
conditions of satisfaction of simpler sentences, others give the
conditions under which the simplest (open) sentences are satisfied.
Truth is defined for closed sentences in terms of the notion of
satisfaction. A recursive theory like this can be turned into an
explicit definition along familiar lines, as Tarski shows, provided the
language of the theory contains enough set theory; but we shall not
be concerned with this extra step.
  Further    complexities enter       if proper    names     and   functional
expressions are irreducible features of the object language. A trickier
matter concerns indexical devices. Tarski was interested in formalized languages containing no indexical or demonstrative aspects.
He could therefore treat sentences as vehicles of truth; the extension
of the theory to utterances is in this case trivial. But natural
languages are indispensably replete with indexical features, like
tense, and so their sentences may vary in truth according to time and
speaker. The remedy is to characterize truth for a language relative
to a time and a speaker. The extension to utterances is again
straightforward.’
  What follows is a defence of the claim that a theory of truth,
modified to apply to a natural language, can be used as a theory of
interpretation. The defence will consist in attempts to answer three
questions:

  1. Is it reasonable to think that a theory of truth of the sort
  described can be given for a natural language?
  2. Would it be possible to tell that such a theory was correct on
  the basis of evidence plausibly available to an interpreter with no
  prior knowledge of the language to be interpreted?
  3. If the theory were known to be true, would it be possible to
  interpret utterances of speakers of the language?

  The first question is addressed to the assumption that a theory of
truth can be given for a natural language: the second and third
questions ask whether such a theory would satisfy the further
demands we have made on a theory of interpretation.

  * For a discussion of how a theory of truth can handle demonstratives and how
Convention T must be modified, see S. Weinstein, ‘Truth and Demonstratives’.

=== p. 132 ===

|. Can a theory of truth be given for a natural language?

     It will help us to appreciate the problem to consider briefly the
case where a significant fragment of a language (plus one or two
semantical predicates) is used to state its own theory of truth.
According to Tarski’s Convention T, it is a test of the adequacy of a
theory that it entails all the T-sentences. This test apparently cannot
be met without assigning something very much like a standard
quantificational form to the sentences of the language, and appealing, in the theory, to a relational notion of satisfaction.® But the
striking thing about T-sentences is that whatever machinery must
operate to produce them, and whatever ontological wheels must
turn, in the end a T-sentence states the truth conditions of a sentence
using resources no richer than, because the same as, those of the
sentence itself.   Unless the original sentence mentions possible
worlds, intensional entities, properties, or propositions, the statement of its truth conditions does not.
     There is no equally simple way to make the analogous point about
an    alien   language   without    appealing,     as   Tarski does,     to   an
unanalysed notion of translation. But what we can do for our own
language we ought to be able to do for another; the problem, it will
turn out, will be to know that we are doing it.
     The restriction imposed by demanding a theory that satisfies
Convention T seems to be considerable: there is no generally
accepted method now known for dealing, within the restriction, with
a host of problems, for example, sentences that attribute attitudes,
modalities, general causal statements, counterfactuals, attributive
adjectives, quantifiers like ‘most’, and so on. On the other hand,
there is what seems to me to be fairly impressive progress. To
mention some examples, there is the work of Tyler Burge on proper
names,” Gilbert Harman on ‘ought’,® John Wallace on mass terms
and comparatives,”’ and there is my own work on attributions of
attitudes and performatives,'® on adverbs, events, and singular
causal statements,!' and on quotation.!?
     If we are inclined to be pessimistic about what remains to be done

 ¢ See J. Wallace, ‘On the Frame of Reference’, and Essay 3.
 7 T. Burge, ‘Reference and Proper Names’.
 8 G. Harman, ‘Moral Relativism Defended".
 9 J. Wallace, ‘Positive, Comparative, Superlative’,      'V See Essays 7 and 8.
 ' See Essays 6-10 in Essays on Actions and Events.       12 See Essay 6.

=== p. 133 ===

(or some of what has been done!), we should think of Frege’s
magnificent accomplishment in bringing what Dummett calls ‘multiple generality’ under control.!?® Frege did not have a theory of
truth in Tarski’s sense in mind, but it is obvious that he sought, and
found, structures of a kind for which a theory of truth can be given.
  The work of applying a theory of truth in detail to a natural
language will in practice almost certainly divide into two stages. In
the first stage, truth will be characterized, not for the whole language,
but for a carefully gerrymandered part of the language. This part,
though no doubt clumsy grammatically, will contain an infinity of
sentences which exhaust the expressive power of the whole language.
The second part will match each of the remaining sentences to one or
(in the case of ambiguity) more than one of the sentences for which
truth has been characterized. We may think of the sentences to
which the first stage of the theory applies as giving the logical form,
or deep structure, of all sentences.

2. Can a theory of truth be verified by appeal to evidence available
   before interpretation has begun?

  Convention T says that a theory of truth is satisfactory if it
generates a T-sentence for each sentence of the object language. It is
enough to demonstrate that a theory of truth is empirically correct,
then, to verify that the T-sentences are true (in practice, an adequate
sample will confirm the theory to a reasonable degree). T-sentences
mention only the closed sentences of the language, so the relevant
evidence can consist entirely of facts about the behaviour and
attitudes of speakers in relation to sentences (no doubt by way of
utterances). A workable theory must, of course, treat sentences as
concatenations of expressions of less than sentential length, it must
introduce semantical notions like satisfaction and reference, and it
must appeal to an ontology of sequences and the objects ordered by
the sequences. All this apparatus is properly viewed as theoretical
construction, beyond the reach of direct verification. It has done its
work provided only it entails testable results in the form of T-sentences, and these make no mention of the machinery. A theory of
truth   thus   reconciles   the   demand   for   a   theory   that   articulates

                 13 M. Dummett, Frege: Philosophy of Language.

=== p. 134 ===

grammatical structure with the demand for a theory that can be
tested only by what it says about sentences.
  In Tarski’s work, T-sentences are taken to be true because the
right branch of the biconditional is assumed to be a translation of
the sentence truth conditions for which are being given. But we
cannot assume in advance that correct translation can be recognized
without pre-empting the point of radical interpretation; in empirical
applications, we must abandon the assumption. What I propose is to
reverse the direction of explanation: assuming translation, Tarski
was able to define truth; the present idea is to take truth as basic and
to extract an account of translation or interpretation. The advantages, from the point of view of radical interpretation, are
obvious. Truth is a single property which attaches, or fails to attach,
to utterances, while each utterance has its own interpretation; and
truth is more apt to connect with fairly simple attitudes of speakers.
  There is no difficulty in rephrasing Convention T without appeal
to the concept of translation: an acceptable theory of truth must
entail, for every sentence s of the object language, a sentence of the
form: s is true if and only if p, where ‘p’ is replaced by any sentence
that is true if and only if s is. Given this formulation, the theory is
tested by evidence that T-sentences are simply true; we have given
up the idea that we must also tell whether what replaces ‘p’ translates
s. It might seem that there is no chance that if we demand so little of
T-sentences, a theory of interpretation will emerge. And of course
this would be so if we took the T-sentences in isolation. But the hope
is that by putting appropriate formal and empirical restrictions on
the theory as a whole, individual T-sentences will in fact serve to
yield interpretations.'*
  We have still to say what evidence is available to an interpreter—
evidence, we now see, that T-sentences are true. The evidence cannot
consist in detailed descriptions of the speaker’s beliefs and intentions, since attributions of attitudes, at least where subtlety is
required, demand a theory that must rest on much the same evidence
as interpretation. The interdependence of belief and meaning is
evident in this way: a speaker holds a sentence to be true because of
what the sentence (in his language) means, and because of what he
believes. Knowing that he holds the sentence to be true, and
knowing the     meaning,      we can      infer his     belief;   given enough

           '* For essential qualifications, see footnote |1 of Essay 2.

=== p. 135 ===

information about his beliefs, we could perhaps infer the meaning.
But radical interpretation should rest on evidence that does not
assume knowledge of meanings or detailed knowledge of beliefs.
  A good place to begin is with the attitude of holding a sentence
true, of accepting it as true. This is, of course, a belief, but it is a
single attitude applicable to all sentences, and so does not ask us to
be able to make finely discriminated distinctions among beliefs. It is
an attitude an interpreter may plausibly be taken to be able to
identify before he can interpret, since he may know that a person
intends to express a truth in uttering a sentence without having any
idea what truth. Not that sincere assertion is the only reason to
suppose that a person holds a sentence to be true. Lies, commands,
stories, irony, if they are detected as attitudes, can reveal whether a
speaker holds his sentences to be true. There is no reason to rule out
other attitudes towards sentences, such as wishing true, wanting to
make true, believing one is going to make true, and so on, but I am
inclined to think that all evidence of this kind may be summed up in
terms of holding sentences to be true.
  Suppose, then, that the evidence available is just that speakers of
the language to be interpreted hold various sentences to be true at
certain times and under specified circumstances. How can this
evidence be used to support a theory oftruth? On the one hand, we
have T-sentences, in the form:

  (T) ‘Es regnet’ is true-in-German when spoken by x at time ¢ if
  and only if it is raining near x at 1.

  On the other hand, we have the evidence, in the form:

  (E) Kurt belongs to the German speech community and Kurt
  holds true ‘Es regnet’ on Saturday at noon and it is raining near
  Kurt on Saturday at noon.

  We should, I think, consider (E) as evidence that (T) is true. Since
(T) is a universally quantified conditional, the first step would be to
gather more evidence to support the claim that:

  (GE) (x)(1) (if x belongs to the German speech community then
  (x holds true ‘Es regnet’ at ¢ if and only if it is raining near x at 1)).

  The appeal to a speech community cuts a corner but begs no
question: speakers belong to the same speech community if the same
theories of interpretation work for them.

=== p. 136 ===

  The obvious objection is that Kurt, or anyone else, may be wrong
about whether it is raining near him. And this is of course a reason
for not taking (E) as conclusive evidence for (GE) or for (T); and a
reason not to expect generalizations like (GE) to be more than
generally true. The method is rather one of getting a best fit. We
want a theory that satisfies the formal constraints on a theory of
truth, and that maximizes agreement, in the sense of making Kurt
(and others) right, as far as we can tell, as often as possible. The
concept of maximization cannot be taken literally here, since
sentences are infinite in number, and anyway once the theory begins
to take shape it makes sense to accept intelligible error and to make
allowance for the relative likelihood of various kinds of mistake.!?
   The process of devising a theory of truth for an unknown native
tongue might in crude outline go as follows. First we look for the best
way to fit our logic, to the extent required to get a theory satisfying
Convention T, on to the new language; this may mean reading the
logical structure of first-order quantification theory (plus identity)
into the language, not taking the logical constants one by one, but
treating this much of logic as a grid to be fitted on to the language in
one fell swoop. The evidence here is classes of sentences always held
true or always held false by almost everyone almost all of the time
(potential logical truths) and patterns of inference. The first step
identifies predicates, singular terms, quantifiers, connectives, and
identity; in theory, it settles matters of logical form. The second step
concentrates on sentences with indexicals; those sentences sometimes
held true and sometimes false according to discoverable changes in the
world. This step in conjunction with the first limits the possibilities for
interpreting individual predicates. The last step deals with the
remaining sentences, those on which there is not uniform agreement,
or whose held truth value does not depend systematically on changes
in the environment.'®

   'S For more on getting a 'best fit” see Essays 10-12.
  !¢ Readers who appreciate the extent to which this account parallels Quine’s
account of radical translation in Chapter 2 of Word and Object will also notice the
differences: the semantic constraint in my method forces quantificational structure on
the language to be interpreted, which probably does not leave room for indeterminacy
of logical form; the notion of stimulus meaning plays no role in my method, but its
place is taken by reference to the objective features of the world which alter in conjunction with changes in attitude towards the truth of sentences; the principle of charity,
which Quine emphasizes only in connection with the identification of the (pure)
sentential connectives, I apply across the board.

=== p. 137 ===

  Thismethod isintended to solve the problem of the interdependence
of belief and meaning by holding belief constant as far as possible
while solving for meaning. This is accomplished by assigning truth
conditions to alien sentences that make native speakers right when
plausibly possible, according, of course, to our own view of what is
right. What justifies the procedure is the fact that disagreement and
agreement alike are intelligible only against a background of massive
agreement. Applied to language, this principle reads: the more
sentences we conspire to accept or reject (whether or not through a
medium of interpretation), the better we understand the rest, whether
or not we agree about them.
  The methodological advice to interpret in a way that optimizes
agreement should not be conceived as resting on a charitable
assumption about human intelligence that might turn out to be false. If
wecannot find a way to interpret the utterances and other behaviour of
acreature as revealing a set of beliefs largely consistent and true by our
own standards, we have no reason tocount thatcreature asrational, as
having beliefs, or as saying anything.
  Here I would like to insert a remark about the methodology of my
proposal. In philosophy we are used to definitions, analyses,
reductions. Typically these are intended to carry us from concepts
better understood, or clear, or more basic epistemologically or
ontologically, to others we want to understand. The method I have
suggested fits none of these categories. I have proposed a looser
relation between concepts to be illuminated and the relatively more
basic. At the centre stands a formal theory, a theory of truth, which
imposes a complex structure on sentences containing the primitive
notions of truth and satisfaction. These notions are given application
by the form of the theory and the nature of the evidence. The resultis a
partially interpreted theory. The advantage of the method lies notinits
free-style appeal to the notion of evidential support but in the idea of a
powerful theory interpreted at the most advantageous point. This
allows us to reconcile the need for a semantically articulated structure
with a theory testable only at the sentential level. The more subtle gain
is that very thin evidence in support of each of a potential infinity of
points can yield rich results, even with respect to the points. By
knowing only the conditions under which speakers hold sentences
true,   we   can   come   out,   given   a   satisfactory   theory,   with   an
interpretation of each sentence. 1t remains to make good on this last
Claim. The theory itself at best gives truth conditions. What we need to

=== p. 138 ===

show is that if such a theory satisfies the constraints we have
specified, it may be used to yield interpretations.

3. If we know that a theory of truth satisfies the formal and empirical
      criteria described, can we interpret utterances of the language for
      which it is a theory?

  A theory of truth entails a T-sentence for each sentence of the object
language, and a T-sentence gives truth conditions. It is tempting,
therefore, simply to say that a T-sentence ‘gives the meaning’ of a
sentence. Not, of course, by naming or describing an entity thatis a
meaning, but simply by saying under what conditions an utterance of
the sentence is true.
  But on reflection it is clear that a T-sentence does not give the
meaning of the sentence it concerns: the T-sentences does fix the truth
value relative to certain conditions, but it does not say the object
language sentence is true because the conditions hold. Yet if truth
values were all that mattered, the T-sentence for ‘Snow is white’ could
as well say that itis trueif and only if grassis greenor 2 + 2 = 4 as say
that it is true if and only if snow is white. We may be confident,
perhaps, that no satisfactory theory of truth will produce such
anomalous T-sentences, but this confidence does not license us to
make more of T-sentences.
  A move that might seem helpful is to claim that it is not the T-sentence alone, but the canonical proof of
                                         a T-sentence, that permits
us to interpret the alien sentence. A canonical proof, given a theory of
truth, is easy to construct, moving as it does through a string of
biconditionals, and requiring for uniqueness only occasional decisions to govern left and right precedence. The proof does reflect the
logical form the theory assigns to the sentence, and so might be
thought to reveal something about meaning. But in fact we would
know no more than before about how to interpret if all we knew was
that a certain sequence of sentences was the proof, from some true
theory, of a particular T-sentence.
  A final suggestion along these lines is that we can interpret a particular sentence provided we know a correct theory of truth that deals
with the language of the sentence. For then we know not only the T-sentence for the sentence to be interpreted, but we also ‘know’ the
T-sentences for all other sentences; and of course, all the proofs.

=== p. 139 ===

Then we would see the place of the sentence in the language as a
whole, we would know the role of each significant part of the
sentence, and we would know about the logical connections between
this sentence and others.
  If we knew that a T-sentence satisfied Tarski’s Convention T, we
would know that it was true, and we could use it to interpret a sentence
because we would know that the right branch of the biconditional
translated the sentence to be interpreted. Our present trouble springs
from the fact that in radical interpretation we cannot assume thata T-sentence satisfies the translation criterion. What we have been
overlooking, however, is that we have supplied an alternative
criterion: this criterionis that the totality of T-sentences should (in the
sense described above) optimally fit evidence about sentences held true
by native speakers. The present idea is that what Tarski assumed
outright for each T-sentence can be indirectly elicited by a holistic
constraint. If that constraint is adequate, each T-sentence will in fact
yield an acceptable interpretation.
  A T-sentence of anempirical theory of truth can be used to interpret
a sentence, then, provided we also know the theory that entails it, and
know that itis a theory that meets the formal and empirical criteria.'’
For if the constraints are adequate, the range of acceptable theories
will be such that any of them yields some correct interpretation for
each potential utterance. To see how it might work, accept for a
moment the absurd hypothesis that the constraints narrow down the
possible theories to one, and this one implies the T-sentence (T)
discussed previously. Then we are justified in using this T-sentence to
interpret Kurt’s utterance of ‘Es regnet’ as his saying that it is raining.
It is not likely, given the flexible nature of the constraints, that all
acceptable theories will be identical. When all the evidence is in, there
will remain, as Quine has emphasized, the trade-offs between the
beliefs we attribute to a speaker and the interpretations we give his
words. But the resulting indeterminacy cannot be so great but that any
theory that passes the tests will serve to yield interpretations.

                 17 See footnote |1 of Essay 2 and Essay 12.

