=== chunk: eemeren-grootendorst-snoeck-henkemans-2002-argumentation-aep/ch1-differences-of-opinion ===
title: Differences of Opinion
source_pdf: docs/sources/eemeren-grootendorst-snoeck-henkemans-2002-argumentation-aep/full.ocr.pdf
pdf_pages: 18-37
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 3
plan_page_end: 22
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 3 ===

                                     .I

        Differences of Opinion

                                    &

ESSENTIALS

           n analysis of argumentation must begin by identifying the main
           difference of opinion, and what type of difference of opinion it is.
           Adifference of opinion arises when one party’s standpoint meets
with doubt from the other party. This is an elementary difference of opinion,
which is single and nonmixed. If the other party is not only doubtful but
adopts an opposing standpoint, then the difference of opinion is mixed. In
addition, if there is more than one proposition involved, the difference of
opinion is multiple.

1.1   DISAGREEMENT AND ARGUMENTATIVE DISCUSSION

People often disagree with each other. There’s nothing special about
that. It is unusual, though, for two people to simply accept the fact
that their opinions differ and just leave it at that. In many cases, that
would be unwise, or even impossible. To resolve the difference of
opinion, they need to discuss the matter and try to reach some kind of
agreement. If they make use of argumentation as a means to achieve a
resolution of a difference, the discussion they are having may be

=== p. 4 ===

called an argumentative discussion. Argumentative discussions are essentially aimed at coming to a reasonable agreement.
    In argumentative discussions there is, by definition, an explicit or
implicit appeal to reasonableness, but in practice the argumentation
can, in all kinds of respects, be lacking in reasonableness. Certain
moves can be made in the discussion that are not really helpful to resolving the difference of opinion concerned. Before a well-considered judgment can be given as to the quality of an argumentative
discussion, a careful analysis has to be carried out that reveals those
aspects of the discourse that are pertinent to making such ajudgment
concerning its reasonableness. It is the task of the analyst to delve
deeply and thoroughly into the various layers of the argumentative
text or exchange so that all the relevant elements are taken into account. In the method introduced in this book for analyzing, evaluating, and presenting argumentation, considerable attention is
therefore paid to the focal points of argumentative discussion and
the ways in which they manifest themselves in the discourse. We
start our treatment of the analysis where argumentative discourse
also startsin practice, thatis, with the difference of opinion that is the
source of disagreement.

1.2     EXPLICIT AND IMPLICIT DIFFERENCES OF OPINION

A difference of opinion arises when two parties do not fully agree on
a given standpoint. It need not be the case that the second party
adopts an opposing standpoint. It is enough that in response to one
party’s standpoint, the other party has doubts or is not sure:

      Paula:   Ithinkschoolsshould spend more time teaching writing
               skills.
      Jack:    Idon’t know, I've never really thought about it.

A difference of opinion or disagreement always involves two parties.
One party puts forward a standpoint and the other party expresses
doubts about it—or, as often happens, goes a step further and rejects
the standpoint:

      Paula:   Ithinkschoolsshould spend more time teaching writing
               skills.
      Dan:     That’s ridiculous! More than enough time is spent on
               that already.

=== p. 5 ===

                                       DIFFERENCES OF OPINION

In the preceding example, the difference of opinion is explicit: Both
the standpoint and the rejection of it are clearly expressed. But this is
not always the case. Especially in written texts, the difference of
opinion often remains implicit because only one party is expressing
its views. The other party’s skepticism or doubt is anticipated:

      Paula:   Schools should spend more time teaching writing skills
               because students these days have a hard time putting
               their thoughts on paper. Furthermore, our schools
               spend ridiculously little time on these skills compared
               to other countries.

We can be sure that Paula anticipates that her standpoint will not be
immediately accepted by everyone because she goes to the trouble of
giving arguments in support of it. (Of course it is possible that she is
mistaken and that there is, in fact, no difference of opinion between
her and her readers.)

1.3     POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE STANDPOINTS

The content of a statement always constitutes a certain proposition in
which a certain property or quality is ascribed to the persons or
things referred to. In a difference of opinion, there are two different
positions taken with respect to the proposition a given statement
contains. A proposition can be a description of facts or events (“Last
year ticket sales at movie theaters declined by 3%”), a prediction
(“Knowledge of foreign languages will be an increasingly important
requirement in job applications”), a judgment (“Amsterdam is the
most beautiful city in Europe”), or advice (“You should brush your
teeth with the softest possible toothbrush”).
  With respect to a proposition, a positive, a negative, or a neutral
position can be taken. Dan, Paula, and Alice each take a different position with respect to the proposition that UFOs are a hoax:

      Dan:     I think UFOs are a hoax.
      Paula:   Idon’t think UFOs are a hoax.
      Alice:   Idon’t know whether UFOs are a hoax or not.

In this example, Dan has committed himself positively to the proposition that UFOs are a hoax. He has adopted a positive standpoint with
respect to the proposition. Paula, who believes that UFOs are not a
hoax, has committed herself negatively to the proposition; she has

=== p. 6 ===

adopted a negative standpoint. Alice has not committed herself to this
proposition in any way because she is not sure about it. For the time
being, she is taking a neutral position.
    In a difference of opinion, there is always at least one person who
puts forward a positive or negative standpoint with respect to some
proposition, and one person who has doubts or does not commit to
any particular standpoint. It may be that the second party not only
has doubts but also adopts an opposing standpoint, but this is a more
complex form of disagreement that is discussed later.

1.4    STANDPOINTS AND EXPRESSIONS OF DOUBT

Because people can have opinions on any subject whatsoever, the
standpoints they adopt can relate to propositions of all kinds.    Aman
may think his wife would look better with a different haircut, that his
tennis game will improve if he uses a lighter weight racket, or that
methadone should be covered by national health insurance.
    Whether a proposition relates to a simple matter or a highly complex
matter, it is always possible to adopt a standpoint on it:

         I think Baudelaire is the best French poet.
         Dictators are always right-wing.
         Itisbad manners tolet an old lady stand when you are seated.
         Behaviorism is an outdated psychological theory.
         The quantum theory is confirmed by the theory of relativity.
         It seems to me her hat was green.
         It’s not true that an English mile is the same as two
         kilometers.
         I don’t think we should cancel our property insurance policy.

Propositions on which standpoints are adopted can vary not only in
subject matter but also in scope. A proposition can apply to everyone
or only to certain individuals; it can apply to a whole class or to only
part of a class. The force of a standpoint taken on a proposition can
vary as well. An opinion can be stated with total conviction or, at the
other extreme, it can be cautiously expressed as a suggestion. Standpoints can thus vary in degree of force and scope:

         I'm certain that everyone knows fear.
         I suspect that everyone knows fear.

=== p. 7 ===

        It seems likely that zinc deficiency delays sexual development
        in some males.
        It is doubtful that all words are translatable.
        I assume thatevenintelligent people occasionally have dumb
        ideas.
        You must have added this up wrong.
        There’s no doubt that everybody needs somebody.
        There’sno doubt that some people can get along very well by
        themselves.

It may be that a standpoint addresses more than one proposition at
once. Usually, though, these propositions are closely connected to
each other. Their connectedness is sometimes made overt by combining them into a single sentence with conjunctions such as and
and but:

        It is unacceptable to me for you to go into my room without
        asking, take books out of my bookshelf, and then lend them to
        someone else.
        It seems to me it is not necessary to take vitamin B complex
        and vitamin C pills at every meal, but that it’s sufficient to
        take vitamins A and D once a week and vitamin B complex
        and vitamin C just once in a while.

When someone expresses a positive standpoint, it is sometimes difficult to separate the standpoint from the proposition to which it is related (“Rock concerts are fun”). The proposition and the standpoint
taken on it are often combined in a single statement, and the positive
nature of the standpoint is often not emphasized, although sometimes it is:

        My standpointis thatit really is true that women are more inclined to hysteria than men are.
        Like Andrew, I believe that Christianity and pessimism are

  Another complication is that it is often extremely difficult to differentiate between a negative standpoint and an expression of doubt
(a neutral position). A cautiously formulated negative standpoint
can sound very much like doubt. A statement that on the surface
seems to express doubt may, therefore, on closer inspection, actually
turn out to function as a negative standpoint. This is quite common

=== p. 8 ===

because, out of politeness, people usually prefer not to make their
disagreement too obvious. There is an inclination to present a negative standpoint as mere skepticism:

         I wonder if that’s really such a good idea.

    Even though expressions of doubt may seem to be thinly disguised
negative standpoints, their consequences are not the same. Adopting
a negative standpoint leads to the obligation to defend that negative
standpoint if it is called into question, whereas merely expressing
doubt does not create any such commitment to defend a standpoint.
Therefore, in analyzing argumentation, it is important to determine
whether someone is only expressing doubt or may be considered to be
adopting a negative standpoint.

1.5     TYPES OF DIFFERENCES OF OPINION

The simplest type of difference of opinion occurs when a standpoint
meets with doubt. This is the elementary form of differences of opinion.
Because a standpoint can be either positive or negative, there are two
variants of the elementary form:

      1 Peter:   Danish men are romantic.
        Alice:   Are they?
    2   Peter:   Danish men are not romantic.
        Alice:   I'm not so sure about that.

Because the elementary form of differences of opinion involves only
one proposition, it is called single. In a single difference of opinion,
only one standpoint (whether positive or negative) is adopted and
then called into doubt by the other party. Such a difference of opinion
is said to be nonmixed as well: There is only one party who is committed to defending a standpoint. The elementary form of differences of
opinion is thus both single and nonmixed.
    Besides single nonmixed differences of opinion, there are also
mixed differences of opinion and multiple differences of opinion.
These can be combined in various ways to form multiple mixed differences of opinion. When analyzed, such complex differences of
opinion must first be broken down into a series of elementary differences of opinion. Altogether, four types of differences of opinion can
be distinguished: single nonmixed (the elementary form), single
mixed, multiple nonmixed, and multiple mixed.

=== p. 9 ===

  In a multiple difference of opinion, the standpoint relates to more
than one proposition. A multiple difference of opinion arises when
someone brings up two or more issues at the same time, for example,
by giving his standpoint on a whole series of matters or by stating an
opinion about a complex theory or about a plan with numerous components. Whenever the standpoint involves more than one proposition on which the other party expresses an opinion, the difference of
opinion is a multiple one:

   Peter:    Danish men are neither romantic nor spiritual, but at
             least you can depend on them.
   Alice:    I’'m not so sure about all that.

  In a mixed difference of opinion, opposing standpoints are
adopted with respect to the same proposition. One party puts forward a positive standpoint and the other party rejectsit (i.e.,adopts a
negative standpoint) or the other way around. This means that instead of simply expressing doubt, the other party responds by adopting an opposing standpoint:

   Peter:    Danish men are not romantic.
   Alice:    Idon’t agree with you.

Itisimportant to be aware that adopting an opposing standpoint always implies doubt (or lack of full agreement) with respect to the
other party’s standpoint. After all, if there were no doubt, then there
would be full agreement with the standpoint, and putting forward
the opposite standpoint would then be pointless. Therefore, any
complex difference of opinion can be broken down into two or more
elementary differences of opinion. The following single mixed difference of opinion can be analyzed as consisting of two elementary
differences of opinion:

   Peter:    You always react way too fast.
   Alice:    Ido not!

The first elementary difference of opinion consists of Peter’s positive standpoint with respect to the proposition “Alice always reacts way too fast” together with Alice’s doubt about this
standpoint. The second elementary difference of opinion consists
of Alice’s negative standpoint with respect to the proposition “Alice always reacts way too fast” together with Peter’s doubt about
that standpoint.

=== p. 10 ===

1.6     MAIN AND SUBORDINATE DIFFERENCES OF OPINION

During the discussion occasioned by a difference of opinion, new
disagreements often surface as the arguments brought forward in defense of a standpoint meet with doubt or rejection. In trying to identify a difference of opinion, it is therefore important to distinguish
between the main difference of opinion and any subordinate ditfer-ences of opinion that may arise during the discussion about the main
disagreement. Look at the following example:

      Alice:    Excuse me, but I think this soup is spoiled.
      Waiter:   Madam, that is impossible.
      Alice:    But look, there’s mold floating around in it.
      Waiter:   That’s not mold, those are little pieces of broccoli.
      Alice:    Well, I've certainly never seen such strange-looking
                broccoli before.

The main difference of opinion here is single mixed and relates to the
proposition “This soup is spoiled.” In addition, there is a multiple
mixed subordinate difference of opinion relating to the propositions
“There’s mold floating in the soup” and “There are little pieces of
broccoli floating in the soup.”
     Instead of being stated at the outset, the main difference of opinion
often comes to light gradually, so that what the two parties actually
disagree on becomes clear only in the course of the discussion. What
also often happens is that the same standpoint is repeated in a somewhat different way. It may look like a totally new standpoint, but
more often than not, the new version simply does a better job of stating the standpoint than the original version did:

      Alice:    The French are chauvinistic.    Imean, most French people
                are chauvinistic. I'll tell you why I think so ...

1.7     HOW TO RECOGNIZE STANDPOINTS AND DOUBT

Certain phrases allow the speaker to indicate explicitly that a standpoint is being taken:

          My standpoint is that socioeconomic and cultural differences
          play a large role in the results of intelligence tests.
          We are of the opinion that people should be able to smoke in
          public places.

=== p. 11 ===

Additional expressions used to indicate that a standpoint is being
taken include:

       I think that men and women should leave each other alone as
       much as possible.
       If you ask me, there has notbeen areal diva since Maria Callas.
       I believe New York is closer to Philadelphia than to Boston.
       My conclusion is that the economic convergence theory leads to
       a faulty interpretation of the evolution of the global economy.
       That’s why Nelly Melba is not nearly as famous as the ice
       cream dessert named after her.
       It simply isn’t true that engaging in sports is necessarily good
       for your health.
       The spinal column thus has three different functions.
       Therefore, the proposal to make all job titles gender-neutral is
       unacceptable language tyranny.
       I'm convinced that girls are better students than boys.

  In other cases, the wording strongly suggests that a standpoint
is being taken but does not provide certainty because (without
more contextual information) it leaves room for a different interpretation:

       The way I see it, he’s only thinking of his own interests.
       In short, television has an adverse effect on children’s
       behavior.
       In other words, the ideal of equal pay for equal work is still out
       of reach.
       In actual fact, Napoleon thought his brother would be ahandy
       tool.
       I would go so far as to say that passive sentences are always
       more difficult to understand than active sentences.
       All things considered, that’s the best route to take.
       What we need to agree on is that nobody will go off and leak the
       news to the press.
       It is nonsense to consider Popper a positivist.
       It’s a good idea to take out travel insurance.

  And then there are also cases where the words themselves do not
express a standpoint, but where there isa verbal pattern that often occurs when a standpoint is expressed, thus facilitating recognition:

=== p. 12 ===

          People shouldn’t want everything all at once.
          All archives ought to be open to the public.
          Pompous language should be avoided.
          You must never let yourself become entirely dependent on
          another person.
          That measure is unfair.
          That you can’t sleep is a sign that something is wrong.

Looking at the context often makes it possible to decide whether a
statement can be analyzed as a standpoint or not. Background information may also be helpful.
     Doubt may be even more difficult to recognize than a standpoint
because it so often remains implicit. The fact that someone finds it
necessary to defend a standpointis, however, a strong indication that
they at least anticipate that their standpoint will meet with doubt. It
may be that they thought they saw the other person frown. Or perhaps putting themselves in the other person’s shoes has led them to
expect to meet with doubt.
     Even though doubt is often not explicitly stated, there are certain
expressions from which doubt can be inferred:

          I don’t know whether Prince Alexander had much respect for
          his father.
          I'm not entirely sure you remembered to turn off the gas.
          I"'m not yet convinced that this new policy is in the best interests
          of children raised by single parents.
          Couldn’t it be that she shares in the blame as well?
          I don'’t really understand why those two points of view are
          I'll have to think about whether that’s a situation where it would
          be wise to raise interest rates.

FURTHER READING

The theoretical background of our pragma-dialectical approach is explained in F. H. van Eemeren and R. Grootendorst, Argumentation, Communication, and Fallacies, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
1992. For a brief overview of other approaches, such as the “Toulmin
model,” the “new rhetoric,”      “informal logic and critical thinking,” and
“formal dialectics,” see F. H. van Eemeren, “The state of the art in argu-

=== p. 13 ===

mentation theory,” in F. H. van Eemeren (Ed.), Crucial Concepts in Arqu-mentation Theory, Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2001, and
for a detailed description of these approaches the handbook Fundamentals of Argumentation Theory of F. H. van Eemeren, R. Grootendorst, A. E.
Snoeck Henkemans, and others, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1996.
  The different types of differences of opinion distinguished here
are explained in more detail in chapter 2 of Argumentation, Communication, and Fallacies. For an overview of the state of the art in the various approaches to standpoints, views, or points of view, consult P.
Houtlosser, “Points of view,” in F. H. van Eemeren (Ed.), Crucial Concepts in Argumentation Theory, Amsterdam: Sic Sat, 2001. How the
presentation of the standpoint may influence the persuasiveness of
the argument is discussed in D. J. O’Keefe, “Standpoint explicitness
and persuasive effect: A meta-analytic review of the effects of varying conclusion articulation in persuasive messages,” Argqumentation
and Advocacy, 1997, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 1-13.

=== p. 14 ===

EXERCISES

     1.   Do the following passages contain a standpoint? If so, indicate
          which utterance functions as the standpoint and explain how
          you can tell that it functions as such.
          a.   Pavarotti to diet and rest
               Luciano Pavarotti, the Italian tenor, said yesterday that he
               had been ordered by doctors to go on a supervised diet and
               not to sing any opera for six months.
               Re “Central Park Shut to Spray for Virus”
               Having recently migrated from New York (whereIlived for
               17 years) to Florida,   have noted with interest the mosquito
               problem back home. Mosquitoes used to be a problem
               down here, though they were more pesky than lethal. Local
               authorities have all but eliminated the pest by releasing an
               enormous amount of dragonflies, which devour the pests at
               an alarming rate.
                  Although I'm no expert on the environmental consequences, it seems to be a reasonably efficient, natural,
               chemical-free solution to a serious problem. I know that the
               results locally have been at once profound and effective.
               A sacked Roman catholic priest will open his own church
               next month to conduct weddings for divorced and expectant
               couples and to bless homosexual relationships. Father Pat
               Buckly intends marrying couples denied the sacrament under Catholicrules. “I believe marriage is for life, but unfortunately people make mistakes and, when people are sincere,
               they should be allowed a second chance. That’s what I'm giving them,” he said.
               The idea of random tests for cannabis on drivers is positively Hitlerian. Cannabis stays in the system for up to 60
               days. You could be in a room where people are smoking
               marijuana and be banned from driving 48 hours later.
     2.   Indicate what difference of opinion is at stake in the following
          texts and to which of the four types of differences of opinion it
          belongs.
          a.   You should always eat something before you go swimming
               and you should never go swimming in the ocean when it is
               low tide, because swimming on an empty stomach gives
               you cramps and when it is low tide you’ll get swept out to
               sea by the current.

=== p. 15 ===

.   Robson: Research on artificial intelligence ought to be actively stimulated by the U.S. government.
    Briggs:   I totally disagree with that.
    Baker:    The granting of the so-called “no claims” bonus by
              car insurance companies not only serves to encourage driversnot to stop after an accidentbutitalsois
              not to the advantage of motorists who have never
              had an accident. I shall present detailed arguments
              in support of these propositions.
. Your report “Sissy English lessons may hinder boys” struck
    a chord. For the past two generations English poetry has
    been in the hands of people—from T.S. Eliot to present Poet
    Laureate—who seem to have a marked distaste for rhythm,
    scansion, rthyme and, above all, for subjects likely to interest
    boys and men. They seem to be introverts occupied with
    combing their pink fluffy souls, to the exclusion of half their
    potential readership.
    Women should not be licensed to box professionally because pre-menstrual syndrome (PMS) makes them unstable. The British boxing board of control refuses to give a
    license to British woman boxer Jane Couch, the world welterweight champion. “PMS would be more likely to give
    women an unfair advantage in the boxing ring than make
    them unfit to don their gloves,” said Katharine Dalton, the
    gynecological endocrinologist credited with naming the
    syndrome. “It will make them much more aggressive and
    better boxers.”
    Ivan Wolffers: “Societies that believe they can protect themselves by taking a firm line with individuals who are infected with the virus are doing just about the most
    ill-advised thing imaginable. They isolate people with
    HIV/AIDS and think that, in so doing, the virus will also be
    isolated. It is not so easy to isolate a virus. At worst, you
    treat a number of people in an inhumane manner and they
    will make sure that no one finds out that they might have
    the virus.”
.   Letter to the editor:
    I must disagree with your identification of the mouse in the
    illustration from The Tailor of Gloucester as a dormouse. The
    mice in the book were modeled on the ordinary house
    mouse. The dormouse has a shorter, furry tail and rounded
    ears and is a reddish color.

=== p. 16 ===

     h.   Letter to the editor:
          Professor Brandon’s assertion that no one who has been repeatedly physically or sexually abused ever “loses” the
          memory runs counter to present professional understanding of traumatic memory. Professor Alan Scheflin and Dr.
          David Brown, in the U.S. Journal of Psychiatry and Law (vol.
          24,2, Summer, 1996) found that amnesia for childhood sexual abuse was “a robust finding across studies using very
          different samples and methods of assessment.”
          A City, So Lovely, Through Woody Allen’s Lens
          As a filmmaker who has tried to record Manhattan at its
          most beautiful and charming, I would like to stand behind
          the position taken by some Greenwich Village residents
          against New York University’s plan to put up a 13-story
          building on West Third Street, destroying two historic
          structures, including a house where Edgar Allan Poe once
          lived (letter, July 25).
             There is no question that much of Greenwich Village is
          New York atitsloveliest, and the trick over the years in filming around Washington Square has been to show the world
          the magic of the great-looking preserved areas while framing out the construction done by N.Y.U.
             No one is questioning the need for the university’s law
          school to expand, but surely it can be worked out in a way
          that does not destroy yet another piece of this fast-vanishing area.
             It is hard for me to believe that a great institution like
          N.Y.U., which had the foresight and good taste to expel me
          many years ago, would be insensitive to this situation.
             WOODY ALLEN

=== p. 17 ===

SPECIAL ASSIGNMENT 1

 a.   Make a review of Texts 1 and 2 in which you:
      1.   Represent the authors’ positions and their main lines of defense.
      2.   Comment on the quality of the individual arguments.
      3.   Give your overall judgement of the arguments. Which of
           the authors has the strongest argument?
 b.   The review should be approximately 4 pages (double spaced).
      Make two copies: Submit one copy to the instructor at the next
      class meeting and one to another student.
 c.   Before the following class meeting, the students should evaluate each other’s reviews and submit their evaluation to the author of the review and to the instructor. In the evaluation
      report, attention should be paid to the following points:
      1.   Have the authors’ positions and arguments been correctly
           represented?
      2.   Does the reader get a clear overview of the organization of
           the authors” arguments?
      3.   Does the criticism on individual arguments seem justified?
           Is it sufficiently supported?
      4.   Is the overall judgment based on a careful weighing up of
           the judgments of the individual arguments?
 d. The instructor will make some general comments on the reviews and will discuss some problems with the help of a sample of the type of errors encountered in the students’ texts.

=== p. 18 ===

          MIDDLE OF THE ROAD
          Laurence Deverall

          This week’s column was what I had prepared for last time but
          the Add/Drop fracas intervened and provided a bit of diversion. By the cartoons and other responses it engendered it
          must have put some people under conviction. I have always
          found that the truth cuts like a knife and stings like salt in an
          openwound, butin the end acts as a catharsis and cleanses the
          soul. Thus I intend to keep on doing it. This week I will undoubtedly get more people mad at me.
            For the past few years I have noticed several things about a
     10   university education: not only does it get progressively more
          expensive but some of that expense is hard tojustify. Books are
          one such item. Why is it that some textbooks are much more
          expensive on campus than off it? Now I realize that smaller
          quantity printings of books call for higher retail prices be-15   cause the cost of production is higher per book. But when I see
          the same text book, The Oxford Illustrated History of Christian-ity, which I purchased for $20 (Can) as a bonus book from my
          book club, offered for sale in the University Bookstore for $55
          plus GST, I have to ask why the over 100% increase? Surely
     20   bulk purchases should result in even lower prices.
            Another question I would like to see answered is why some
          professors change text books every time they offer the same
          course? Often some very expensive books that students have
          HAD to buy are rendered valueless after one semester. Stu-25   dents have few other options than to drop the thing in the
          trash can if it is no part of their major. Many books at the IVCF
          second-hand book sale this year fell into this category. For students who rely on the resale of books to offset the cost of the
          next semester’s books, this can be a real hardship.
     30     Onereason that could be offered for this situation is that the
          sum total of knowledge is doubling every few months and so
          new text books are needed. But surely not every discipline is

=== p. 19 ===

changing so fast that the texts are out of date in four months!
No, there must be other reasons for the switching.
  [ have discovered, I think, a significant chain of events that 35
may help explain why students are suckered into forking out
excessive cash for books. First, in order to get research funding
from the government (which helps to pay profs’ salaries) the
University has to have the profs doing research. One of my instructors told me that only 20% of his time was spent on class 40
related activities, the remainder was spent on research, book
writing and committee meetings.
  Secondly, profs have to prove they are doing research by
publishing their findings. If they do not, they will not get increases in salary and, in fact, may lose their jobs. This hap- 45
pened to one of my profs—he spent too much time helping his
students and was given the Royal Order of the Boot.
  Thirdly, it costs money to publish books, particularly in
small quantities in less popular disciplines. Someone has to
pay for these books and, you guessed it, it’s the students. I 50
would hate to suggest that our illustrious teachers go to their
annual conferences to look at their colleagues” new books offered for sale at the publisher’s book fairs (which, quite coincidentally, are held in conjunction with these events) and agree
to make those new books required texts for their next classes.       55
The possibility of such collusion certainly exists. Thus there is
a potential conflict of interest which in the end costs students
extra money to grease the wheels of the system.
  Is it possible that in reality universities don’t exist for the
benefit of students but function only to provide places in 60
which academics and administrators can pursue their careers?
Could it be that we students are only an unwanted but necessary adjunct to a university’s activities? I think we need to let
the establishment know that we are not just an intrusion into
their working day but the very reason for their existence. If we 65
do this, who knows, we might just end up a little better off in
pocket for our labors.

=== p. 20 ===

          DEVERALL'S “DRIVEL" DECONSTRUCTED
          David Ingham (Department of English)

          Since he finished a degree at the U of L., Laurence Deverall
          should certainly know better than to write the unresearched,
          prof-bashing drivel which appeared in his last column (“Middle of the Road,” 26 Sept), and while it should be obvious that
          his allegations shouldn’t be taken seriously, it’s just possible
          that some of your readers might mistakenly think there is
          something to them.
            First of all, the suggestion that there is a conspiracy among
          faculty to bilk impoverished students of their much needed
     10   money by forcing them to buy inferior, overpriced texts written by faculty colleagues is as ludicrous as it is repugnant.
          But Mr. Deverall’s “logic” is skewed at every step. He notes
          that faculty are expected to do research, and show evidence
          of that by publishing, but either suppresses or didn’t bother
     15   to find out the facts that 1) the overwhelming majority of
          what we publish is articles (in scholarly journals) and not
          books, and 2) of those academic books which do get published, the vast majority are not suitable for use as undergraduate texts. They’re much more likely to be of interest
     20   only to specialists in the field, and libraries. (By the way, they
          aren’t like novels—we don’t get royalties or anything like
          that.) And when we do go to “book fairs” at the conference of
          Learned Societies (the conference of conferences), where we
          see our colleagues’ new books, our text orders have already
     25   been in for a month. Moreover, the titles at these “book fairs”
          are unlikely to be suitable as texts anyway: We buy them for
          ourselves. [sic] (Logical, when you think about it—the very
          latest, most advanced and specialized research is rather often beyond what we can expect of the average undergradu-30   ate.) In actuality, the way we find out about potential new
          texts is through the publisher’s reps who regularly come
          around to our office flogging their wares.

=== p. 21 ===

  I'll tell you why we do change texts, however. Often it’s because there’s a new edition out, and since the old edition goes
out of print—which I agree it sometimes does with suspicious 35
frequency—we couldn’t keep using it if we wanted to (I've
tried). Or we come across a better text; you do want us to use
the best texts we can, don’t you, as long as they’re comparable
in price (or cheaper). Sometimes we find a text just as good (or
nearly so), but substantially cheaper, surely you’d prefer for 40
us to switch in those cases. And once in a while we switch just
for the sake of variety. Would you want to take a course from
someone who’s been giving exactly the same lectures on exactly the same books for twenty years? We do care about our
students, and definitely sympathize with them over high text 45
prices (I support a student, so I do know about it, too).
  So put up or shut up, Mr. Deverall. Name names—supply
evidence. I want to know just which faculty members have deleted texts and changed to ones which are a) inferior, b) more
expensive, and c¢) written by friends. If you can’t, then an apol- 50
ogy and a retractionis in order. When you say, “I would hate to
suggest ... ” and then go on to do exactly that, you move only
from the realm of legally actionable slander to that of slimy insinuation.
  In addition, there are a few other problems with your col- 55
umn. For one thing, don’t blame the bookstore for high prices.
They have no choice but to pay whatever the publisher
charges, and their mark-up is designed specifically to break
even (in fact, they lose money on books, and make it up on
clothing). Did it ever occur to you that maybe, just maybe, the 60
reason you got your book so cheaply from the bookclub was
not because the bookstore is trying to rip you off, but because
your wealthy book club was giving you a discount???
  You also imply that most faculty devote too little time to
teaching, and that those who do care about their students risk 65
dismissal. Balderdash. Faculty here are required to meet minimum standards in three areas, teaching, research, and service.
To spend time on only one of these three to the exclusion of the
other twois to refuse to comply with the conditions of employment. And when you quote one of your instructors as claiming        70
to spend only “20% of his time on class related activities,” you
conveniently neglect to say 20% of what. Twenty percent of 100
hours a week? Remember, 20% of 40 hours is only eight, which

=== p. 22 ===

          is abit difficult to believe if he’s spending nine hours a week in
     75   the classroom. (In case anyone’s interested, judging by my
          own discipline—English—your instructors likely spend an
          average of between 10 and 20 hours per week per course,
          counting teaching, preparation, marking, seeing students and
          so on.)
     80     Finally, I am shocked and appalled at your apparent assumption that students who purchase texts which are “not
          part of their major” will automatically either sell them, or if
          they can’t be sold, “drop the[m] in the trash can.” I hope and
          pray that atleast a few students here occasionally take courses
     85   outside their majorsjustbecause they’re interested, and might
          even believe that at least some of the text books they bought
          are valuable in and of themselves, not just at the cash register.
          Believe it or not, some of us were actually brought up to respect
          books, and to care about other things than money. So if a text is
     90   of no use to you, and you can’t sell it, for God’s sake don’t just
          “drop the thing in the trash can,” donate it to the library. Perhaps someone else can find value in it.
            In conclusion, the professors at this University are here primarily because of their students—it’s a pretty stupid career
     95   choice for anyone who’s not. And unless you produce some
          evidence to support your defamatory allegations, it certainly
          looks as if we care a good deal more about our students, Mr.
          Deverall, than you do about the truth.

