=== chunk: eemeren-grootendorst-snoeck-henkemans-2002-argumentation-aep/ch2-argumentation-and-discussion ===
title: Argumentation and Discussion
source_pdf: docs/sources/eemeren-grootendorst-snoeck-henkemans-2002-argumentation-aep/full.ocr.pdf
pdf_pages: 38-51
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 23
plan_page_end: 36
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 23 ===

                  Argumentation
                  and Discussion

                                    &

ESSENTIALS

           critical discussion is an ideal of argumentative discourse aimed
           at resolving a difference of opinion by determining whether the
           standpoints at issue ought to be accepted or not. A critical discussion proceeds through four stages: the confrontation, opening, argumentation, and concluding stages. In practice, argumentative discourse
corresponds only partly with this ideal model and it may also be the case that
only one of the parties expresses its view, so that the discussion remains implicit. An analysis of arqumentative discourse must examine to what extent
the discourse can be reconstructed as a critical discussion.

2.1   RESOLVING A DIFFERENCE OF OPINION

A difference of opinion is said to be resolved as soon as one of the two
parties revise their original position. If the difference of opinionis an
elementary one, resolution is reached when the doubting party abandons his or her doubts, or when the other party retreats from his or
her standpoint:

=== p. 24 ===

         At first   Iwasn’t sure whether I agreed with you, but I have to
         admit you are right.
         Now that I've heard all of your reservations, I've come to
         think my standpoint isn’t so strong after all.

     The end of active disagreement does not necessarily mean that
the difference of opinion has truly been resolved. It is important to
distinguish between resolving a difference of opinion and merely
settling it. Settling a disagreement means that it is simply set aside.
This can be achieved in an uncivilized manner by intimidating or
forcing the other party into submission. A civilized, but arbitrary,
way of settling a disagreement is to lay the matter before a third
party who serves as judge and decides who is right. Another civilized way of settling a disagreement is to decide the winner by
drawing lots. Still another way is to put the matter to a vote and let
the majority decide:

         During the health care debate, the Italian Prime Minister got
         his way by forcing the issue to a vote, which the socialist
         party lost. Clearly, however, not all of the socialist members
         of the Cabinet are convinced of the desirability of the new
         policy measures.

     In such cases, the difference of opinion has not really been resolved. True resolution is reached only if both parties come to hold
the same position on the grounds of rational argumentation. Either
both parties adopt the same standpoint (positive or negative) or else
both parties begin to question the standpoint.

2.2     A MODEL OF A CRITICAL DISCUSSION

To be able to deal with a difference of opinion in a rational way, there
needs to be an argumentative discussion. This is a discussion in which
argumentation is used to try to determine to what extent a given
standpoint is defensible. The purpose of an argumentative discussion is different from that of an informative discussion, which serves
primarily to convey information.
     In real-life discussions, informative and argumentative elements
are often combined. Once the participants realize that their viewpoints differ, it is usually not long before they decide to attempt to
find out which view is the most tenable, and this, in turn, requires a
thorough knowledge of each other’s viewpoints. When the discus-

=== p. 25 ===

sionis not simply aimed at informing someone about something, it is
best to view it as an argumentative discussion.
  Ideally, an argumentative discussion is a critical discussion aimed
at resolving a difference of opinion. A critical discussion takes place
between a party who defends a certain (positive or negative) standpoint, the protagonist, and a party who challenges this standpoint, the
antagonist. Only when an antagonist counters the standpoint of the
protagonist with an opposing standpoint is this antagonist also the
protagonist of a standpoint. During the discussion, protagonists try
to convince antagonists of the acceptability of their standpoints,
while the antagonists keep raising doubts or objections.
  A critical discussion aimed at resolving a difference of opinion
proceeds through four stages, which are distinguished analytically
in the following model:

  1.   In the confrontation stage the parties establish that they have a
       difference of opinion. In a nonmixed difference of opinion, this
       simply means that one party’s standpoint is not immediately
       accepted by the other party, but is met with doubt or criticism.
       In a mixed difference of opinion, the other party advances the
       opposite standpoint.
  2.   Intheopening stage the parties decide to try toresolve the difference of opinion. They assign the roles of protagonist and antagonist (in a mixed difference, there are two protagonists and two
       antagonists). They also agree on the rules for the discussion
       and on the starting points.
  3.   In the argqumentation stage the protagonist defends his or her
       standpoint against the sometimes persistent criticism of the
       antagonist by putting forward arguments to counter the antagonist’s objections or to remove the antagonist’s doubts.
  4.   In the concluding stage the parties assess the extent to which
       the difference of opinion has been resolved and in whose favor. If the protagonist withdraws the standpoint, the difference of opinion is resolved in favor of the antagonist; if the
       antagonist abandons his or her doubts, it is resolved in favor
       of the protagonist.

2.3    THE IDEAL MODEL AND ARGUMENTATIVE PRACTICE

Of course an ideal model does not describe reality. And yet, real-life
argumentative discussions do sometimes approach the model. In an

=== p. 26 ===

article in a Dutch sports magazine, the author’s contribution to the
discussion comes very close to following the model:

          The Light Athletic Association leadership recently met to discuss
          the future of athletics. This is undoubtedly a praiseworthy effort.
          Dick Loman gave an enthusiastic report of this meeting and invited
          anyone not present to join in the discussion. I am answering his call
          by expressing my opinion in this article.
          Part of the discussion concerns whether or not to further
          centralize the training of athletes. And this is the point I
          would like to speak to.
          For years, centralized training has bothered me ... Not
          because of ... but primarily because ...
          And so, I repeat: do away with centralized training.

In the italicized introduction, the author announces her status as protagonist. Apart from this announcement, there is no reference to the
opening stage. The author proceeds with the confrontation by putting
forward the standpoint that centralized training should be done away
with. The argumentation stage is complete. (To save space it has not
been repeated here.) The concluding stage is also explicit, even though
the author, in giving the conclusion, of course speaks only for herself.
     Itis quite common for little time to be spent on the opening of a discussion. Discussionrules and other starting points are often taken for
granted and do not require explicit mention. This is not entirely correct, however. It is precisely the lack of “proper procedure” in a discussion—the lack of explicit rules—that causes many discussions to
run into difficulty.
     The conclusion of a discussion is more often explicit, though seldom as explicitly expressed as in the following newspaper column:

          A discussion about the relationship between parliament and
          public opinion could be fascinating, but not with Polly
          Toynbee. I hereby declare that I have won the discussion and
          will now go on to more important matters.

Polly Toynbee, in her reply, seems to have no expectation that the discussion can be concluded with agreement on both sides:

          Letmebe frank: if have a debate with someone, I never have
          the illusion that my opponent will say at the end: “Polly
          Toynbee, you are right; I have made a mistake; from now on1
          shall defend your standpoint.”

=== p. 27 ===

This is taking things too far. And yet, it is highly desirable that both
parties should reach agreement on the outcome of the discussion.
Fortunately, many discussions do end in agreement on the outcome,
or at least come close to it. Note that even in the case of discussions
decided by voting, it is desirable that both parties reach agreement
on the outcome:

        It was gratifying that the membership of the party, after thorough consideration, decided unanimously in favor of proposition 102.

  Most argumentative discussions, then, depart considerably from
the model. The parties often donot go through all four of the discussion stages or not in the same order. Sometimes one party declares
that the difference of opinion has been decided in its favor before
the argumentation stage has even been completed. Sometimes, in
the course of the discussion, the parties realize they have failed to
clearly identify what exactly they disagree on, so that it becomes
necessary to go back to the confrontation stage. Elements of the different stages may be missing that are indispensable for the resolution of the difference of opinion. The discussion may also contain a
great many elements (e.g., expressions of courtesy, jokes, and anecdotes) that, without directly contributing to the resolution, help to
make the discussion go more smoothly.
  Such discrepancies between theory and practice do not diminish
the usefulness of the model. By definition, an ideal differs from reality.
The idealized model has an important critical function: It can be a tool
for identifying where a real-life argumentative discussion goes
wrong. It makes it possible to identify what necessary elements are
missing or inadequately represented. For example, comparison with
the model makes it possible to say that, in one instance, the discussion
fails because the difference of opinion has not been clearly identified,
whereas in another instance it fails because roles have not been properly assigned or because discussion rules have not been agreed on.
  The model of a critical discussion is more than a tool for evaluating whether the discussion has proceeded correctly. Itis also anin-strument for analyzing a discussion (whether simple or complex)
in a constructive manner. In this regard it has a heuristic function:
Elements that are only implicitly present in the discussion can
more easily be identified, and the various elements of the discussion can be analyzed in a way that clarifies their role in the resolution process.

=== p. 28 ===

2.4     ARGUMENTATION IN AN IMPLICIT CRITICAL DISCUSSION

Most peopleregard the argumentation stage as the “real” discussion.
It does in fact largely determine the outcome. Taken together, the arguments used by the protagonist in the argumentation stage to make
a case are what constitute a discursive text. In other words, a discursive text, or case, is the sum total of all argumentation brought forward to defend a standpoint.
     In a nonmixed difference of opinion, there is always just one party
who presents a case, however simple or complex this argument may
be. The antagonist simply asks questions and does not adopt a standpoint. In a mixed difference of opinion, each party has a standpoint
that requires defending; therefore, each party presents a case.

      Paula:   It seems to me it’s to my advantage that I have never
               done anything like this before.
      Jack:    That’s not an advantage if you ask me.
      Paula:   Why not?
      Jack:    You first explain why you think it’s an advantage, and
               then I'll tell you why I think it’s not.
      Paula:   Well, as far as I'm concerned, it’s pretty simple: the fact
               that I have no experience means that I approach it with
               no preconceived notions. And for a screen test that’s important.

      Jack:    It’snotatall anadvantage to do a screen test with no experience, because you havenoidea whatto do to present
               yourself in the most favorable light. And that’s really
               tricky.

During the latter part of this discussion, Paula and Jack each present
a case for their standpoint. Here their arguments are part of an ex-plicitdiscussion, but more often than notarguments are part of an implicit discussion. Animplicit discussion is one in which only one of the
parties participates.
     Even if the other party does not explicitly participate, however,
this party’s point of view is still taken into account. This may, for instance, become apparent when the protagonist explicitly refers to the
potential objections of a real or imagined antagonist:

          There’s no other country in the world where women are as
          well integrated into the army as in Norway—and don’t go
          bringing up the case of Israel, because in Israel women don't

=== p. 29 ===

       fight in the front lines. Have you ever seen women soldiers in
       one of those intifadah photos?

  A practical complication is that argumentation sometimes takes
the form of a monologue and it is hard to recognize any of the elements of a discussion. Even so, a monologue defending a standpoint
should be viewed as a one-way dialogue. Such monologues are so
common that people don’t evenrealize that argumentative discourse
always presumes a discussion or dialogue situation, even though it
may be implicit. Argumentation always has the aim of convincing
potential critics, whether or not they are actually present.
  If the discussion remains implicit, parties putting forward their
case as a rule need to do more than just present their argumentation.
They need to incorporate the other stages of the discussion process in
their case as well, and perhaps point out potential doubts and known
objections. At the outset they need to establish that a difference of
opinion exists or threatens to arise (confrontation stage). Next, they
have to make it clear that they are prepared to resolve the difference
by following certain rules for argumentative discussions; they may
briefly mention these rules and any starting points (opening stage).
Then of course they present their own argumentation, perhaps referring to the views of an opposing party (argumentation stage). Finally,
they need to assess to what extent the difference of opinion has been
resolved by their argumentation (concluding stage). This is more or
less what happens in the following case:

       A lot of people have been saying recently that penalties for
       criminals should be stiffer. I don’t agree with this and I will
       explain why. First I will review all the arguments I’ve heard
       in favor of stiffer penalties and show why they are unsound.
       [...]
       I believe I have conclusively shown that stiffer penalties for
       criminals don’t make any sense. This is a matter on which
       reasonable people need no longer disagree.

  There are instances in which the antagonist at whom the case is directed is not specified; it may be entirely unclear who the potential
antagonist might be. But when argumentation is analyzed, we proceed from the assumption that it is an attempt by the speaker to convince someone who does not yet agree with the speaker’s
standpoint. After all, if everyone already agreed, there would be no
reason to go to the trouble to argue the case.

=== p. 30 ===

FURTHER READING

In theories of critical discussion, informal as well as formal models have
been developed. The informal model which constitutes the basis for this
book can be found in E. H. van Eemeren and R. Grootendorst, Speech
Acts in Argumentative Discussions, Dordrecht/Berlin: Foris/Walter de
Gruyter, 1984, and Argumentation, Communication, and Fallacies: A
Pragma-Dialectical Perspective, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1992. Formal models of argumentative discussions aimed at resolving a dispute are studied in “dialogue logic.” See, for instance, E. M.
Barth and E. C. W. Krabbe, From Axiom to Dialogue: A Philosophical Study
of Logics and Argumentation, Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1982, and D. N.
Walton and E. C. W. Krabbe, Commitment in Dialogue, Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press, 1995. In “Disputation by design,” Arqu-mentation, 1998, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 183-198, S. Jackson discusses the use
of models of argumentative discussions for localizing problems in discussions on the World Wide Web.

=== p. 31 ===

EXERCISES

  1.   Each of the following passages is part of an argumentative discussion. Indicate to which discussion stage or stages itbelongs.
       a.   Ithinkitwould be very interesting to see whether I can convince you of the opposite point of view. But you should first
            let me finish my argument before you respond. And we
            should not resort to any kind of cheap trick such as constantly quoting important people who share our views.
       b.   In the end I have to admit that Johnson’s last argument is
            convincing enough to make me doubt whether the solution
            I proposed is really so desirable.
       c.   Prison director: “It is just fashionable nonsense to think that
            it doesn’t make any difference whether you work in a
            prison orin a car factory. Itis this strange tension in a prison
            that appeals to me. In prison, no two days are alike. Say
            what you like about the people I'm dealing with, but they
            are never dull or predictable.”
       d. As a practicing psychotherapist, I found much to disagree
            with in your article “Child abuse memories.” Your claims
            aboutthe advantages of hypnosis are wrong. I have seen the
            process of false memory produced by hypnosis and suggestion.   Iwould notrely onany “memory recovery technique.”
            To encourage someone to believe they were abused is unlikely to make their lives better. It might even be harmful.
            The psychotherapist or psychiatristis not an investigator or
            detective. The psychiatrist is in no position to decide who is
            telling the truth. This is the opinion of many professional
            psychotherapists and you should know better.
       e.   Robert Buderi’s thesis is that the invention and development of radar in the Second World War changed the
            post-war world. Specifically, Dr. Buderi asserts that many
            of the devices that govern lives today—computers, microwaves, lasers, rockets, commercial and military activities
            in space—are a direct result of the concentration of many
            scientists onradar during the war. The propositionis interesting, but not supported by the miscellaneous collection
            of chapters in this book, with their heavy bias towards
            American scientists and technology. In the following I will
            show why.
       f.   Letter to the editor:
            Speak for yourself, Kate Figes, about how motherhood

=== p. 32 ===

         turns intelligent women into fearful, watchful, exhausted,
         children’s-TV-watching mommy blobs. I was determined
         to avoid this stuff—and did.
             When my children were younger, I kept all my childless
         friends, had some evenings out, read books, took fitness
         classes, held a demanding job and still had time to spend
         with the tots. And if you have a reasonable partner, there’s
         no reason that each of you can’t go away on your own for a
         few days from time to time. Sure, having children is a big
         job, but this kind of wallowing in earth-mother self-indulgence makes it even harder for mothers to take full part in
         the workforce and society; such an article makes childless
         women and most men regard women as self-absorbed,
         helpless homebodies who aren’t fit for the mainstream.
     .   Which parts of the contributions of Andy, Brian and Colin
         canberegarded as part of (1) the confrontation stage, (2) the
         opening stage, (3) the argumentation stage, and (4) the concluding stage?
     .   Which parts of the discussion are not relevant to the resolution of the dispute?
         A    Andy: Now that I've got you for a moment—have you
                       got round to thinking about your birthday yet?
                       Are you having people over or not?
         B    Brian: 1was thinking of having a party, actually. Not a
                       badideaitseems tome. Whatdo you think? Why
                       don’t we get straight down to it and work out
                       who I'm going to invite—I mean, am I going to
                       ask Christine or not?
         C   Andy:     Christine? Of course you'll ask her. You must!
         D    Brian:   Actually, I don’t think I ought to.
         (Enter Colin. He joins Andy and Brian.)
         E    Colin:   What’s new?
         F    Brian:   Whatdoyoumeannew? Hey, have some coffee.
         G   Andy:     Hi,Colin. Dropped in attheright momentagain,
                       didn’t you?
         H Colin:      This coffee is much too strong again. What were
                       you talking about?
         I   Brian:    Whether I ought to ask Christine to my party.
         J   Colin:    Course you should.
         K Andy:       You keep out of this Colin. Let Brian decide that
                       for himself in peace. I'd just like to know, Brian,
                       exactly why you object to Christine coming.

=== p. 33 ===

                    Colin:   She can come as far as I'm concerned!
          L         Andy: I'm sure your girlfriend would like to hear that.
                             But I just happen to be talking to Brian. If you
                             don’t mind: what'’s the objection of her coming?
                             It’s your birthday, so you decide.
          N         Brian: But you're the one who’s so interested in inviting her. I think you should start by telling us why
                             it’s so important that she should come.
          O         Andy: I'vetold you, it’s your birthday, so it’s up to you
                             to say why she isn’t welcome.
          P         Brian: That’sall very well, butl have the strongimpres-sion that you’ve some reason of your own. So
                             you’ve got to say why, too.
          Q         Colin:   Are you two managing to work things out? Just
                             invite her, will you? Stop going on aboutitall the
                             time.
          R         Andy:    Do you want it to be another one of those awful
                             drags? ... Christine is the nicest woman I've met
                             in a long time.
          9]        Brian:   And you wanted me to stay away, did you? I can’t
                             ask Christine: Michael would come too, the creep!
                    Andy:    Okay then: exit Christine.
                    Colin: Figured it out, have we?
                    Andy: Just give me a beer.

          X s <cH
                    Brian: Okay, so what are we doing? Asking her?
                    Andy: No, no I said you were right, didn’t I? Have it
                             your own way. Don’t bother.
3.   The adult education center in London offers courses in “conversation and discussion techniques.” In one of these courses, a
     role play was performed that takes place in the board room of
     Harrods department store. The following is an excerpt from
     this role play.
     a.   Which parts of the contributions to the discussion by the
          chairman and by Mrs. Hans can be assigned to (1) the confrontation stage, (2) the opening stage, (3) the argumentation stage, and (4) the concluding stage?
     b.   Explain why the contributions to the discussion by Mrs.
          Hans in F and S are not part of a critical discussion aimed at
          resolving a disagreement.
     c.   Has the main dispute in this discussion been resolved or
          merely settled?
          A         Chairman: If everyone is present then I would like to wel-

=== p. 34 ===

                      come everyone to the meeting. I believe the
                      problem is clear. We have a shortage of personnel and new workers cannot be found.
                      We have received an offer from an organization for job placement of discharged prisoners that would make ex-prisoners
                      available to us as employees. Mrs. Foster is
                      present as an expert to tell us more about
                      this.   Iwould then like to open up the matter
                      for discussion.   would also like to mention
                      that, if at all possible, this meeting ought to
                      be concluded within twenty minutes.
     (The explanation by Mrs. Foster follows.)
     B   Chairman:    If all of thisis clear, then I would like to hear
                      the opinion of those involved.
     C   Mrs. Hans: Well, in my view it is sheer madness to employ a bunch of discharged prisoners, and
                      that twenty per cent of my staff members
                      are tobereplaced by criminals. Thave to put
                      them next to a cash register and they cannot
                      be trusted, because, in my view, normal
                      people do not end up in prison; so I think
                      it’s an absurd idea to employ discharged
                      prisoners at Harrods. This company has a
                      good name and you just cannot put these
                      people there!
     D   Mr. Jones:   Well, I would very much like to know who
                      exactly is to come. If these are people who
                      have committed minor offenses, then
                      that’s all right. I would rather have someone who has committed a traffic offense
                      than someone who has stolen something.
                      Afterall, once a thief, always a thief. That’s
                      my opinion!
     E   Mrs. Foster: Now, I understand that Mrs. Hans believes
                      the entire situation to be rather absurd.
                      That’s a shame. Statistics show that others—
                      including the management of Woolworth'’s
                      —are really quite satisfied with the employment of discharged prisoners. In terms of
                      percentage, there is no risk whatsoever. The
                      percentage of repeat offenders is the same as

=== p. 35 ===

                  the percentage of the population that steals
                  for the first time.
F   Mrs. Hans:    Well, if that’s the case, then I can’t really say
                  anything more against it. But I still can’t
                  agree to it.
G Mr. Bowers:     I think that they ought to be put to work in
                  the administrative department; a stolen paper-clip isn’t so bad.
H    Mr. Jones:   Yes, but the administrative department
                  contains personal details of staff members.
                  It is, after all, not so very wise to let thieves
                  have access to that information.
I   Myr. Bowers: Well, that’s true.
]   Mrs. Hans:    It’s simply insane. A bunch of thieves in the
                  sales department.
K   Mr. Jones:    But after all, that’s not to say they will all
                  start stealing again, is it?
L   Mrs. Hans:    Well, once a thief, always a thief, that’s
                  what you just said yourself!
M    Mr. Jones:   You're probably right. Are there any financial guarantees?
N Mrs. Foster: Yes, indeed there are. Any damage that
                  might be caused by these discharged prisoners will be compensated for.
O    Mr. Jones:   Well, in that case, I can’t see any real objections any more. We ought to give these people a chance.
P Mr. Bowers:     We are notasocial institution, we are a commercial company!
Q Mrs. Hans:      Exactly! No criminals in my department!
R   Mr. Jones:    Well, well, what arguments do you have for
                  the proposition that you can still regard them
                  as criminals?
S   Mrs. Hans:    Well, I don’t know. They simply are, that’s all.
T   Chairman:     Well, it seems to me it’s time to make a decision. Are there still people who have insurmountable objections to the employment of
                  discharged prisoners in our company?
U   Mrs. Hans:    Yes, me!
V    Chairman:    Good. No one else? Then I think we are decided. Only one vote against. Going on the
                  statistics, we conclude that it is a responsi-

=== p. 36 ===

                 ble decision to employ these people in the
                 company. Mrs. Foster, thank you for your
                 information. Thanks to everyone for taking part in this discussion, and have a safe
                 trip home.

