=== chunk: eemeren-grootendorst-snoeck-henkemans-2002-argumentation-aep/ch5-structure-of-argumentation ===
title: The Structure of Argumentation
source_pdf: docs/sources/eemeren-grootendorst-snoeck-henkemans-2002-argumentation-aep/full.ocr.pdf
pdf_pages: 78-105
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 63
plan_page_end: 90
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 63 ===

                                    S
                 The Structure
               of Argumentation

                                   &

ESSENTIALS

          he simplest arqgumentation consists of just one single argument,
          but the structure of argumentation can also be much more complex. Multiple argumentation, for instance, consists of more
than one alternative defense of the same standpoint. And in coordinative
argumentation, several arguments taken together constitute the defense of
the standpoint. Another complex argumentation is subordinative argumentation, with arguments supporting arguments. Through the use of indicators, the verbal presentation sometimes provides evidence to the
analyst as to whether the arqumentation is multiple, coordinative, or subordinative. Quite often, however, there are no such indicators; then it may
be difficult to tell coordinative and multiple argumentation apart. When
in doubt, for the sake of reasonableness, the analyst should opt for a maximally argumentative analysis and analyze the argumentation as multiple.
By relying on a well-considered reconstruction of subordinative argumentation, it is sometimes possible, in a well-defined context, to arrive at a
more specific formulation of elements that are left unexpressed than would
otherwise be justified.

=== p. 64 ===

5.1     SINGLE ARGUMENTS

The defense of a standpoint often consists of more than a single argument. Several single arguments can be combined and arranged in a
number of different ways to form the defense of a standpoint. Argumentation can be evaluated only after it is clear how the arguments
fit together. And it can only be determined what the structure of the
argumentation is whenitis understood how complex argumentation
can be broken down into single arguments.
     In the simplest case, a defense consists of one single argument, that
is, an argument that in fully explicit form consists of two and only two
premises. Usually, one of these is unexpressed, so that the single argument appears to consist of only one premise. A defense consisting of
only one single argument is very common. The argument is often embedded in a larger discourse that is not primarily argumentative:

          In concluding this review of your accomplishments here over
          the years, Petrewsky, I would like to congratulate you on behalf of all of us on your 35 years with the company. We hope
          you will enjoy the rest of the day, together with your wife and
          children. You have earned a substantial gift, and we are
          proud to offer you this trip to Hawaii, because you have worked
          very hard for it. Bon voyage!

When the defense amounts to one single argument, the problem is
not so much how tobreak it down into components as to identify that
there is an argument in the first place. The argument has the simplest
structure possible.
     Nonetheless, in order to get a more complete picture of the argument, which will be necessary for the evaluation, it may be helpful to
make explicit the premise that is so often left unexpressed in a single
argument. This is especially true if the unexpressed premise is pursued later in the discussion. In the example just given, the unexpressed premiseis something like “Hard work should be rewarded.”

5.2     MULTIPLE, COORDINATIVE,
AND SUBORDINATIVE ARGUMENTATION

The first type of complex argumentation is multiple argumentation. It
consists of alternative defenses of the same standpoint, presented
one after another. These defenses donot depend on each other to support the standpoint and are, in principle, of equal weight. Each de-

=== p. 65 ===

fense could theoretically stand alone and is presented as if it were
sufficient to defend the standpoint:

        You can’t possibly have met my mother in Marks & Spencer’s in
        Sheringham last week, because Sheringham doesn’t have a Marks
        & Spencer’s, and as a matter of fact she died two years ago.

  In the second type of complex argumentation, coordinative argumentation, the arguments do not form a series of alternative defenses.
Coordinative argumentation is one single attempt at defending the
standpoint that consists of a combination of arguments that must be
taken together to constitute a conclusive defense. The component
parts of coordinative argumentation are dependent on each other for
the defense of the standpoint. They can be dependent on each other
in several ways. Sometimes they are dependent because each argument by itself is too weak to conclusively support the standpoint:

        The dinner was organized perfectly, for the room was exactly
        the right size for the number of guests, the arrangement of tables was well thought out, and the service was excellent.

Another way they can be dependent is when a second argument rules
out possible objections to the first argument, thereby reinforcing it:

        We had no choice but to go out to eat, because there was nothing to eat at home and all the stores were closed.

One possible objection to the first argument, “There was nothing to
eat at home,” is that food could have been bought at a store. Putting
forward the second argument, “All the stores were closed,” prevents
this objection from being raised.
  Characteristic of the third type of complex argumentation, subordinative argumentation, is that arguments are given for arguments. The
defense of the initial standpointis made layer after layer, as it were. If
the supporting argument for the initial standpoint cannot stand on
its own, then it is supported by another argument, and if that argument needs support, then a further argumentis added, and so on, until the defense seems conclusive. Subordinative argumentation may
consist of many layers:

        I can’t help you paint your room next week,
        I have no time next week,

=== p. 66 ===

         I have to study for an exam,
         otherwise I will lose my scholarship,
         I'm not making good progress in my studies,
         I've already been at it for more than five years.

In subordinative argumentation, the speaker anticipates that certain
parts of the argumentation will need further defense. The part to be
defended then becomes a substandpoint, which is defended by means
of subargqumentation. This subargumentation, in turn, can contain a
subsubstandpoint, which needs to be defended by means of
subsubargumentation, and so on. Subordinative argumentation can be
seen as a chain of reasoning where the weakest link determines the
strength of the whole, regardless of the strength of the other links.

5.3    THE COMPLEXITY OF THE ARGUMENTATION STRUCTURE

Argumentation can be of greater or lesser complexity, depending on
the number of single arguments it consists of and the relation between
these arguments. The number of arguments that need to be advanced
depends, among other things, on the nature of the difference of opinion that the argumentation is intended to resolve. Resolving a multiple difference of opinion naturally requires more than one single
argument (albeit not necessarily complex argumentation). Each proposition to be defended or refuted requires at least one single argument,
so if there are several propositions being defended or refuted, then in
principle several single arguments have to be put forward:

         Although you maynotagree, I thought Dickinson was a good
         president and Sanford was not, because Sanford was just a
         skilled bureaucrat, while Dickinson was a really creative politician.

If the difference of opinion is a mixed one, then more than one party
must present a defense, each of which may consist of a single argument or of more complex argumentation:

      Max:    Sanford was a good president.

=== p. 67 ===

   Ellen:    I entirely disagree.
   Max:      He managed to push a huge budget cut through Congress and satisfy all objections, while at the same time
             the whole educational system got reorganized.
   Ellen:    Allhe did was to carry out other people’sideas in an unimaginative way, without adding a single original idea
             of his own. He made a mess of secondary school education, not to mention the damage he inflicted on university education—it hardly deserves the name any more.

The complexity of the structure of the argumentation depends on
what objections it addresses or anticipates. If protagonists meet with
or anticipate objections to certain parts of their argument, then they
need to come up with argumentation to defend those parts with still
more arguments, thereby creating subordinative argumentation:

   Jacobs:   Petrewsky could be let go, because he already has 35
             years of service and he wouldn’t mind.
   Peters:   What do you mean, he wouldn’t mind?
   Jacobs:   Well, for quite a while now he has been talking about
             wanting to take it easy and this way he will get the
             chance to do that!
   Peters:   Butis it really true that he wants to take it easy?
   Jacobs:   Yes, because he told me so himself.

The criticism or anticipated criticism being countered by argumentation does not always involve the content of the premises (as in the
Petrewsky example), but may also relate to their justificatory power.
The antagonist may accept a given premise, but still doubt whether it
lends sufficient support to the standpoint. To counter such criticism,
the protagonist may supplement the original argumentation with
other arguments that directly support the standpoint, thus creating
coordinative argumentation:

   William: This is a lousy vacation house; there’s not even a corkscrew here.
   Ellen:     Don’t you think you're exaggerating a bit?
   William: Yes, but there aren’t any wine glasses either, the chairs
              aren’t comfortable, and there’s no fireplace.

The antagonist’s responses or anticipated responses may lead the protagonist to put forward not only subordinative or coordinative argu-

=== p. 68 ===

mentation, but also multiple argumentation. Because multiple
argumentation consists of several alternative defenses of the same
standpoint, each of which by itself should be sufficient, it might look
like “overkill.” One reason for giving additional arguments is if the
protagonist anticipates that one or more of the attempts to defend the
standpoint might be unsuccessful. If the argumentation is directed toward a large group of people, for instance, their responses may be
quite diverse. That seems to have been taken into consideration by the
Society Against Profanity in composing the text for a poster campaign:

          When we designed the poster for train stations, we thought
          we might need more than just the main slogan: “Missed the
          train? Don’t swear!” Lots of people might wonder why they
          shouldn’t swear. In response to this question, we gave three
          arguments that we thought most people would see something in. Naturally, we don’t expect each of these reasons in itself
          to be equally convincing to everyone.

     Acceptability is always a matter of degree: people accept things to
a greater or lesser degree. This is another reason multiple arguments
are given. The additional arguments may raise the level of acceptance. Too many arguments may of course have the opposite effect:

          I am not seeing her, because I hardly even know her. I'm not
          attracted to blonde women anyway. Besides, with all the budget cuts at work, I'm way too busy these days for affairs like
          that. And don’t forget that I still love you very much.

     When all is said and done, the structure of argumentation is determined by the choices of the protagonist. In some cases a protagonist
may put forward one single argument, while in other cases the protagonist may use a whole series of single arguments. The way in
which the various single arguments relate to each other and to the
standpoint is reflected in the argumentation structure.

5.4     REPRESENTING THE ARGUMENTATION STRUCTURE
SCHEMATICALLY

Complex argumentation can always be broken down into a number
of single arguments. And that is exactly what happens when the argumentation structure is analyzed. To present the results of the analysis in a clear and concise way, use can be made of the schematic
overviews in Figures 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, and 5.4.

=== p. 69 ===

                         a         Single argumentation

                      Petrewsky has earned the gift

                             A

               1.1                                         (1.1°)
  Petrewsky has worked                           (Hard work should be
            hard for it                                 rewarded)

FIG. 5.1.   Single argumentation.

                     b            Multiple argumentation

                     You can’t possibly have met my
                      mother at Marks & Spencer’s
                             in Sheringham last week

                             Vi                     L

                     1.1                                 1.2
      Sheringham doesn’t have                   My mother died two
        a Marks & Spencer’s                         years ago

FIG. 5.2.    Multiple argumentation.

=== p. 70 ===

     Asingle argument is first assigned the number of the standpoint to
whichitrefers (e.g., number 2), followed by anumber of its own (e.g.,
2.1). An unexpressed premise that has been made explicit is given in
parentheses and is assigned a number followed by an apostrophe (’)
(e.g.,2.1"). The two parts constituting the single argument are joined
by a horizontal line and an ampersand (&), and an arrow links the explicit premise to the standpoint advocated.
     To show clearly that the arguments that form part of multiple argumentation all support the same standpoint, each argument is assigned the number of the standpoint followed by a number of its
own: 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, and so on. Each separate argument has an arrow
leading to the standpoint.
     To show that the single arguments in coordinative argumentation
have to be taken together in order to defend the standpoint, they are
joined together with a brace and there is one single arrow linking the
whole group to the standpoint. The relatedness of the single arguments
is emphasized by linking them with horizontal lines and by assigning
them all the same number, followed by a letter (2.2a, 2.2b, 2.2¢, etc.).
     Subordinative argumentation is indicated by the use of decimal
points. An argument that has just one point (2.1 or 2.1a or 2.1") cannot
yet be called subordinative. Subarguments are indicated by two
points (2.1.1 or 2.1.1a or 2.1.1"); subsubarguments have three points
(2.1.1.1), and so on. To emphasize that subordinative argumentation

                      c          Coordinative argumentation

                                 We had to go out to eat

                             |                              |
                      1.1a                                  1.1b
           There was nothing to                   All the stores were
                 eat at home                               closed

     FIG. 5.3.   Coordinative argumentation.

=== p. 71 ===

              d        Subordinative argumentation

                  | can’t help you paint your room
                               next week

                                    1.1
                      | have no time next week

                                  1.1.1
                     | have to study for an exam

                                    i\
                                 1.1.1.1
                  Otherwise I'll lose my scholarship

                                    i\
                               1.1.1.1.1
                   I’'m not making good progress
                             in my studies

                               1.1.1.1.1.1
                    I've already been at it for more
                            than five years

FIG. 5.4.   Subordinative argumentation.

=== p. 72 ===

consists of a chain of arguments that are dependent on each other,
they are represented in the schematic overview as a series of “vertically connected” arguments, linked with arrows.
     Multiplicity, coordination, and subordination can also occur in
combination, as is illustrated in Figure 5.5.

                         | can’t attend the big peace demonstration

                     7                 1                             N
                                                           |                     I
     1.1                       1.2                  1.3a                  1.3b
     | have                    I’'m going            | don’t entirely || The slogan
     problems                  to be out of | | agree with the            should be
     with my feet              the country |         |slogan they         such that
                               that day              are using            everybody
                                                                          agrees

                 N                      4                       4
        I                I
     1.1.1a      H1.1.1b        2.1                     1.3a.1
     | spent         | was       My sister              The slogan
  time in            beaten      in London              is biased
     a concen-                   is getting
  tration                        married
     camp                                                      1‘

                                      1.3a.1.1a                     1.3a.1.1b
                                      They make it             —1 World peace is
                                      sound like                    threatened from
                                      world peace                   many sides
                                      is being threatened
                                      from only one side

     FIG. 5.5.   Combinations of various types of complex argumentation.

=== p. 73 ===

5.5   THE PRESENTATION OF COMPLEX ARGUMENTATION

In order to arrive at a reasonable evaluation of argumentation, its
structure must be carefully identified: Is it single, multiple,
coordinative, or subordinative, or even more complex?
  The protagonist almost never explicitly indicates how the argumentation is structured. The following example is an exception to
this; here the writer makes it immediately clear that the argumentation is not to be viewed as multiple but as coordinative:

          Why is the capital letter larger than the lower-case letter?
          There are six reasons for this, none of them conclusive in itself.

There are, however, certain words and expressions that may serve as
indicators of the different types of structure. Indicators of multiple argumentation include needless to say, in fact, apart from, not to mention,
another reason for this is, one argument
                                      for this is, in thefirst place, secondly, by the way, incidentally, quite apart from, and aside from. The following arguments use some of these indicators:

      a    Idon’tseehow youcould have expected me to pick you up.
           In the first place, you have never even told me where you
           live. In the second place we didn’t make any arrangement.
           Not to mention the fact that   Twould have had to leave work at
           least an hour earlier.
      b    There’s no way to decide whether winning a gold medal is
           due to talent or to training. Aside from the fact that talentis a
           very hard concept to define, some champions train a whole
           lot and others train very little. Quite another argument is that
           nobody has ever managed to say anything meaningful on
           this subject. Apart from all this, I would like to point out that
           the issue is wrongly put.

Indicators of coordinative argumentation include as well as thefact that,
in addition (to thefact that), on top of that, and don’t forget that, especially
because, even, plus, not only ... but also, and more importantly.
  The following samples of argumentation use some of these indicators:

      a    Youshould give me an allowance. In addition to the fact that 1
           would like to buy lunch in the cafeteria, like all the other
           kids, it’s a pain to always have to ask you for money for

=== p. 74 ===

           school supplies. And don't forget that Thave to save for entertainment and presents for my friends.
      b    You’dbebetter off studying English than French. Not only is
           English more closely related to Dutch than French is, and
           therefore easier to learn, but you also already know quite a
           bit. Plus the fact that you hear English a lot more on television, so you know what it should sound like.

In subordinative argumentation, one argument is supported by another one, so that each supporting argument is really the beginning
of a new round of argumentation. The various arguments that form
part of subordinative argumentation may therefore be preceded by
any of the standard indicators of argumentation: because, for that reason, therefore, after all, that is why, since, in view of, and so on. If each of
the components of subordinative argumentation is marked by one of
these indicators, the argumentation structure is made much clearer:

          The Youth Center performs an important service for the community. It fills the vital need for a place where young people
          can stay, because some young people don’t have a home to go
          to, because their parents don’t want them around, since they
          refuse to adapt their behavior to what their parents want, because they find it suffocating.

Whereas there are very few indicators that are used exclusively in
subordinative argumentation, there are certain combinations of general indicators of argumentation that only occur with subordination,
for example, for because, because because, because in view of. These combinations occur surprisingly often in everyday speech:

      a    I’d better not stay any longer, for because I'm so tired you
           must find me boring company.
      b    I think it is cool, because because the color is so bright it is
           flashing.
      ¢    Unfortunately you can’tstay overnight at our place. Because
           in view of the fact that my mother is staying with us, there’s
           not enough room in the house.

There are certain expressions for rounding off a complex argument
that tend to be used only with coordinative or subordinative argumentation, for example, I conclude that, this follows from, in conclusion,
it follows from this that, taking everything into consideration, all things
considered I believe I am justified in saying that, ergo. These expressions

=== p. 75 ===

are a little too pompous to be used for concluding a single argument,
and they are not used with multiple argumentation.
  One point of confusion is that some words—even some very common ones—are used to mark both multiple and coordinative argumentation. Examples include and, also, and also, furthermore, and moreover.

5.6   A MAXIMALLY ARGUMENTATIVE ANALYSIS

Coordinative and multiple argumentation are not always easy to distinguish from each other. Speakers rarely state which type of complex argumentation they are using, and indicators cannot always be
relied on for clues either.
  Sometimes the only way to tell whether the argumentation is
coordinative or multiple is to go by the content of the arguments and
the standpoint. In the following example, the content of a is clearly
coordinative and that of b is clearly multiple:

      a    I think we ought to buy this scarf, because it’s nice and
           warm and we can always exchange it.
      b    Ofcourse youshould buy thatlaptop.It'snotall that expensive, and it’s OK to be a little extravagant on something you
           work with every day, don’t you think?

In g, the fact that the scarf can be exchanged is not in itself sufficient
reason for buying it. Therefore, the two arguments clearly have to be
taken together. In b, on the other hand, the two not altogether consistent arguments are easily seen to be alternatives, as the second argument obviously takes into account that the first argument (“It’s not
all that expensive”) might not be accepted.
  In some instances, itis not at all obvious whether each argument is
intended as a separate defense of the standpoint or whether the arguments are intended to be conclusive only when taken together, as in
the following example:

          The book was severely damaged during transport. There are
          scratches on the cover, and the first five pages are dog-eared.

If one of the single arguments in complex argumentation turns out to
be unsound, then the consequences for evaluating the argumentation as a whole are quite different depending on whether the structure is coordinative or multiple. In multiple argumentation there is
more than one line of defense so that if one is undermined, the others
still stand and may still provide conclusive defense of the stand-

=== p. 76 ===

point. In coordinative argumentation, there is only one line of defense so that if any part of it is eliminated, the whole defense is
weakened or even destroyed.
     Because it affects the rest of the analysis, it is important to determine
as carefully as possible whether the argumentation is coordinative or
multiple. In doing this, one must consider not only the verbal presentation with possible indicators and any other clues, but also the Communication Principle and the assumption that the speaker is making a
serious attempt to resolve the difference of opinion.
     In truly ambiguous cases, where there is just as much reason to
choose the coordinative as the multiple analysis, it is preferable to
opt for an analysis as multiple argumentation. This ensures that each
part of the argumentation is judged on its own merits and that the
strength of each single argument is duly examined. If each of several
single arguments by itself is sufficient to defend the standpoint, then
argumentation consisting of two or more such arguments must be
unassailable. And if one of these arguments is undermined, it does
not do irreparable damage to the defense. This approach—choosing
to analyze the argumentation as multiple in case of ambiguity—is
called (on the analogy of the strategy of maximally argumentative interpretation) the strategy of maximally arqumentative analysis.
     Coordinative and multiple argumentation are quite commonly
found side by side:

            I'm not very satisfied with this book, because the price is way
            too high. Secondly, it’s in French, whereas a lot more people
            could read it if it were in English. In the third place, I wasn’t
            allowed to work on it.

This argumentation has the following structure:

     1       I'm not very satisfied with this book.
     1.1     The price is way too high.
     1.2a    It’s a French-language book.
     1.2b    If it were in English, more people would be able to read it.
     1.3     I wasn’t allowed to work on it.

5.7        UNEXPRESSED PREMISES AND COMPLEX ARGUMENTATION

As explained in chapter 4, for argumentation that does not have a
well-defined context, it is preferable when making unexpressed pre-

=== p. 77 ===

mises explicit to assume that for every incomplete single argument
there is one unexpressed premise. When the context is well-defined,
it is usually possible to further specify the unexpressed premise. It
may even turn out that a whole chain of subordinative arguments
was implied and can now be reconstructed.
  Suppose that the popular singer Madonna is in a TV ad, surrounded by a group of attractive members of the jet set, and confides
to the audience the following message:

           You should use Wonder skin lotion. I use it myself!

Clearly, something is unexpressed here. If we knew nothing further
about the context of these utterances, we could let it go at assuming
that the unexpressed premise has to be something like “Whatever
Madonna does you should do too.” But in this particular context we
can do better. We know that Madonna is appearing in a TV ad and
that she belongs to the jet set, some members of which we have just
glimpsed. This background information allows us to come up with a
more specific (and more complex) formulation of the unexpressed
premise, leading to the following reconstruction of Madonna’s argumentation:

   1           You should use Wonder skin lotion.
   1.1         Madonna uses Wonder skin lotion.
  (1.17)       (Whatever Madonna does, you should do too.)
  (1.1’.1)     (Madonna belongs to the jet set.)
  (1.1".1")    (Everything the jet set does, you should imitate.)

“Everything the jet set does, you should imitate” is the unexpressed
premise that connects the unexpressed premise “Madonna belongs
to the jet set” with the unexpressed substandpoint “Whatever Ma-donna does, you should do too.” This is indicated by means of the
two apostrophes () following the numbering of this premise.
  A person who had forgotten that Madonna belonged to the jet set
(1.1".1) would be reminded of it by theimages in the TV ad. The TV ad
provides a well-defined context. Without this context, the formulation of the unexpressed premise as “Whatever Madonna does, you
should do too” (1.1") would be too free an interpretation. And without supplementing this unexpressed argument with the unexpressed subordinative argumentation needed to support it, the total
argumentation would be robbed of the justification that this well-defined context provides.

=== p. 78 ===

     In this example, the context is well defined because the TV ad in
which the argumentation is set provides a clear background and because Madonna is a well-known personality. In other words, the
clues are found outside the verbal presentation. But in other instances, it may be the verbal presentation (everything that is said)
that provides clues, in which case we speak of a well-defined verbal
context. In either case, when analyzing argumentation, all the clues
in the context should be used. Generally speaking, the better defined
the context is, the more specific the commitments that can be attributed to the speaker.
     In this same way, unexpressed standpoints can sometimes be more
specifically formulated. A variation on Madonna’s example, in the
same context, will illustrate this:

              I use Wonder skin lotion.

In an analysis of this utterance, the argumentation can be reconstructed as follows:

     (1)            (You should buy Wonder skin lotion.)
     (1.1)          (You should use Wonder skin lotion.)
     (1.17)         (In order to use skin lotion you first have to buy it.)
     1.1.1           Madonna uses Wonder skin lotion.
     (1.1.17)       (Whatever Madonna does, you should do too.)
     (1.1.1.1)      (Madonna belongs to the jet set.)
     (1.1.1".1")    (Everything the jet set does, you should imitate.)

FURTHER READING

For more elaborated treatments of problems concerning the structure of
argumentation, see F. H. van Eemeren and R. Grootendorst, Arqumenta-tion, Communication, and Fallacies: A Pragma-Dialectical Perspective,
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1992, chapter 7, J. B. Freeman, Dialectics and the Macrostructure of Arquments, Berlin: Foris / Walter
de Gruyter, 1991, A. F. Snoeck Henkemans, Analysing complex argumentation, Amsterdam: Sic Sat, 1992, and D. Walton, Argument Structure: A
Pragmatic Theory, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1996. An overview of the state of the artin the study of complex argumentation is provided in “Argumentation structures” by A. F. Snoeck Henkemans in F.
H.van Eemeren (Ed.), Crucial Concepts in Argumentation Theory, Amster-dam: Amsterdam University Press, 2001, chapter 5.

=== p. 79 ===

EXERCISES

  1.   Is the argumentation in the following examples coordinative,
       subordinative, or multiple?
       a.   There are two reasons why Dutch drama is practically unknown internationally. In the first place, the subject matter
            of Dutch playsis not of universal interest, and in the second
            place, Dutch is not a widely spoken language.
            I must have made a pathetic impression on him. First I followed him to Central Africa, and after that, [ even accompanied him on a six-month hiking trip.
            It is a remarkable country. There is no sunlight to speak of;
            nevertheless, there are 15 million inhabitants.
            Aunt Agatha thought the house should be condemned. It
            smelled like rotten fish everywhere and the staircase had
            collapsed.
            The team uniform has become a recurring theme in our
            meetings. In my opinion it is time to stop arguing about the
            team uniform and do away with it altogether for games we
            play away. For those matches it doesn’t serve any purpose,
            since the team members wear numbers anyway.
 2.    Identify the structure of the argumentation given for the standpoints in italics in the following texts.
       a.   The criterion of Boultbee:
            If the reverse of a statement is absurd, then the original
            statement is an insult to the intelligence and ought never to
            have been made. (Standpoint: A statement, the reverse of
            which is absurd, must not be made.)
            All the talk you hear about language deficiency is wholly
            based on social prejudices. In this lecture, I shall defend the
            proposition that there is no language deficiency in children from
            the working class, because language deficiency does not exist
            at all—not in anyone—and it even could not exist, neither
            here nor anywhere else.
            He thought that she had acted wrongly: she ought to have admitted that he was right, or ought to have said that she had
            not understood him.
            Newspaper article on the murder of Billie—Jo Jenkins:
            The foster father of Billie-Jo Jenkins was jailed for life last
            night after being convicted of her “horrendous” murder
            with an 18-inch tent peg, on what the trial judge described as
            compelling evidence.

=== p. 80 ===

                  Sion Jenkins, aged 40, the deputy headmaster, was found
               guilty of the 13-year-old’s savage killing at the end of a 2-day
               trial. There were shouts of “you monster” and “bastard”
               from the school-girl’s natural family seated in the public gallery. Two female jurors burst into tears. Billie—Jo’s relatives
               hurled abuse and spat.
                  The schoolgirl’s natural mother, Deborah Harry, sobbed
               quietly while her father Bill jumped to his feet and punched
               the air.
                  The judge, Mr. Justice Gage, told Jenkins: “It was a furious attack, the motive for which only you now know. That
               girl was in your care as a foster child. You yourself were a
               deputy headmaster at the time, a man in a position of trust
               and authority in respect of children. These base facts are
               sufficient to show what a horrendous crime this was.”
     3.   Analyze the argumentation structure of the following argumentative texts.
          a.   Health education authority:
               It’s never easy trying to find the right moment to tell your
               partner you want to use a condom. No matter how long the
               relationship. But leave it too late and it becomes almost impossible.
                  Once you're completely naked you can become so physically and emotionally involved that you run the risk of not
               using a condom at all.
                  Which means not only running the risk of an unwanted
               pregnancy, but also of contracting one of the many sexually
               transmitted diseases. Like chlamydia, gonorrhea and, of
               course, HIV, the virus which leads to AIDS.
                  So why not say you want to use a condom while you’'ve
               still got your underwear on?
                  You're still in control of your emotions, yet it’s now become clear to both of you that you want to have sex.
                  What if your partner doesn’t have one? Then carry some
               on you, just in case.
                  Because if there’s only one thing that’s going to be worn
               in bed, make sure it’s a condom.
           .   Letter to the editor:
               Polly Toynbee says child benefit can “be universally paid to
               all mothers, taxing it back from high-earning fathers.”
               While this may perhaps be technically feasible, it would be
               thoroughly undesirable.

=== p. 81 ===

    It would increase stress—where the mother lives with a
 man who is not the father of her child(ren) the tax would
 presumably be levied on the stepfather, who may already
 contribute more than he thinks fair to the upkeep of another
 man’s child(ren).
    Would it be levied only on husbands or on unmarried
 partners, too? If the former, it would penalize marriage; if
 the latter, is Polly Toynbee recommending that the Inland
 Revenue dispatch bedsheet and DNA inspectors to see who
 is living with whom?
    Would it be levied only on top-rate taxpayers, or at all tax
 rates? If the former, it would severely penalize single-earning couples, whose joint income may be as low as half that
 of dual-earner couples where each partner is taxed only at
 the 23 per cent rate; if the latter, it would also magnify the
 unemployment and poverty traps.
    Thereis a very simple solution: tax child benefit as the income of the recipient. According to the Inland Revenue, this
 would yield £700 a year, a figure which would rise insofar
 as mother’s income rose.
 Parks and Plazas, the Urban Backyard
 To the Editor:
 Re “New York Still Needs Patches of Green,” by Thomas
 Balsley (Op-Ed, July 22):
    As a cultural anthropologist who has spent 25 years
 studying the psychological, social and cultural importance
 of parks and plazas, I would like to offer even more evidence that we should be redesigning, not eliminating, urban public space.
    From a 15-year study of Latin American plazas, I discovered that well-planned public space increases social tolerance through informal cross-class and cross-gender contact.
 Urban public spaces, in New York as well as in Mexico and
 Costa Rica, provide an important forum for ideas and values
 to be expressed and worked out.
    In addition, many neighborhood parks serve as backyards for people of modest means. Reducing the opportunities for relaxation and solace makes very little sense when
 their needs are so great.
. A Tax That Seems to Hit a Nerve
 To the Editor:
 Re “The Moral Sense in Estate Tax Repeal,” by Alan Wolfe
 (Op-Ed, July 24):

=== p. 82 ===

                It is surely true, as Mr. Wolfe suggests, that most
             American parents, like most parents everywhere, have
             a deep desire to help their children flourish. It is also
             true that Congressional Republicans have been trying
             to exploit that desire as a way of generating support for
             repeal of the estate tax.
                Yet repeal would primarily benefit those who are already in an unusually good position to assist their children, even with the tax in place. And it would do
             nothing for those Americans who have not taken partin
             the recent prosperity, and who have no wealth to leave
             their children.
                Thatis why many people—including many parents—
             oppose repeal of the estate tax. And it is why we should
             be wary of concluding, as Mr. Wolfe does, that repeal of
             the tax truly “corresponds to the basic moral instincts of
             most Americans.”
     e.   Letter to the editor:
          Your City Comment supporting the abolition of duty-free
          shopping is out of tune with majority politics and consumer
          opinion and ignores the facts.
             Duty-free costs the taxpayer nothing and abolition
          would not in fact lead to any additional revenue for the
          Treasury—indeed, a detailed study by National Economic
          Research Associates (NERA) concludes that net government receipts could fall by £18 million a year. Other studies
          have produced similar results for the Netherlands, Ireland
          and France.
             Duty-free is an internationally successful business; to
          abolish it within the EU only would leave EU operators at a
          competitive disadvantage.
             Why should City Comment rely on an emotional viewpoint rather than face the facts about a successful industry
          which creates revenue, employs more than 140,000 people
          and benefits both the traveler and the economy as a whole?
          The Internet Can’t Free China
          By JAMES C. LUH
          While the Senate holds back from voting on normal trade
          with China because of hesitation about Chinese nuclear
          help to Pakistan, the senators should take another look at
          another issue in the trade debate: the questionable argu-

=== p. 83 ===

ment that modern technology will force China to liberalize its political system.
  As the Chinese expand trade with the West and
make greater use of computers and the Internet, the
thinking goes, an unstoppable current of ideas will       10
spur political reform. “When over 100 million people
in China can get on the Net,” President Clinton has
argued, “it will be impossible to maintain a closed
political and economic society.” But will it?
  The Chinese government will never squelch all dis-      15
sident voices on the Web, but because Internet communication relies on each person or computer having
a unique, traceable address, the authorities can find
ways to locate users and punish activities they don’t
like. There is an active debate in the United States,     20
where political freedom is sacrosanct and individuals
are guaranteed due process of law, about the clash between citizens’ civil liberties and corporations’ innovations for protecting security or profits. Imagine the
implications in an authoritarian state.                   25
  China is already monitoring what goes out over
the Internet and identifying where messages come
from. Ask Huang Q)i, if you can: authorities have detained him since June 3 for operating a Web site about
human-rights abuses. Or ask Lin Hai, who served           30
prison time for sending some 30,000 Chinese e-mail
addresses to a dissident information service.
  Even those who only read dissident sites, rather
than contributing to them, cannot be sure of safety.
Surfing the Internet appears untraceable on the sur- 35
face, but users unwittingly leave behind detailed
footprints, as evidenced by privacy concerns among
Internet users in this country. Chinese computer experts have plenty of tools and techniques at their disposal to follow these footprints.                         40
  Then there is blocking and filtering technology. A
user can’t get a single bit of digital information from
the Internet without connecting his computer to it, and
services that provide the connections can interpose
equipment or software that blocks certain types of traf- 45
fic or keeps users from reaching certain Web sites.

=== p. 84 ===

                     The Chinese government has already blocked disagreeable Western sites like The Washington Post
     50            and Amnesty International, but the censors have had
                   difficulty identifying offending sites fast enough to
                   block them all. It could solve that problem by adopting a strategy used by a number of American-based
                   systems, like America Online’s AOL@School service:
                   Block access to any Internet services not on a pre-ap55            proved list.
                     Business trends within China could also end up
                   limiting the Internet’s power there as a liberalizing
                   force. Analysts of the industry think many Chinese
                   will eventually connect to the Internet not with per-60            sonal computers, as Americans typically do, but
                   through devices like set-top boxes and mobile
                   phones, which have cumbersome keyboards. Chi-nese who went online this way could shop or get government messages, but might find it difficult to send
     65            e-mail or post opinions to a Web bulletin board.
                     As Western companies work to protect copyrights
                   and enhance the security of information they collect,
                   new techniques for control of Internet communication
                   are being developed every day. Even if American com-70            panies do not sell their innovations to China directly,
                   the Chinese will be able to develop them on their own
                   or buy them from other nations. The Internet won’t be
                   free in China until other influences force the country to
                   lift its most insidious trade barrier: the ban on ideas
     75            that threaten Communist Party rule.

              a.   Search for examples of multiple, coordinative, and
                   subordinative argumentation in recent newspapers,
                   journals and magazines.
               .   Before the next meeting, students compare their examples in discussion groups. They try to reach an
                   agreement on which of the examples presented by
                   their fellow-students can indeed be considered as
                   clear examples of the intended structures. They
                   should mark those cases that they cannotagree upon,

=== p. 85 ===

           or that they find doubtful, so that they can present
           these examples for further discussion in the following class meeting.

      a.   Formulate a standpoint on an issue of your own
           choice, and make a case for this standpoint in which
           all three forms of complex argumentation occur.
           Give a representation of your argumentation in the
           way that has been explained in chapter 5.
      b.   Submit a copy of the representation of the argumentation to the instructor at the next class meeting.

Analyze the structure of the following text by making a schematic overview. Submit the overview to the instructor at the
next class meeting.
  Inhis article “Plagiarism: Arich tradition in science,” editor
John Lowell argues, referring to an article by Dr. P. Smith, that
Copernicus was also guilty of plagiarism: it appears that he
“forgot” to mention that Aristarchos of Samos (310-230 BC)
had already arrived at a heliocentric theory. It is, however,
doubtful that Copernicus knew of this.
  Kant spoke of heliocentricity as a Copernican revolution:itis
directly contrary to “common sense” (after all, we can see that
the sun rises in the east and sets in the west), and more importantly, to a centuries-old geocentric, Christian-Scientific tradi-   10
tion. Copernicus needed all the support he could muster for his
theory, and cited a great many classical writers to that end.
  The fact that Copernicus did not refer to Aristarchos is not
easy to understand, if he had, indeed, known him to be the intellectual author of heliocentricity. However, the best source       15
for Aristarchos’ theory was Archimedes’ Sand reckoner, which
did not “appear” until 1544, a year after Copernicus’ death.
Another source, in which Aristarchos is vaguely cited, was
possibly only consulted by Copernicus after he had already
announced his hypothesis.                                            20
  In conclusion, it can be said that the accusation that Coper-nicus committed plagiarismis at the very least doubtful and is

=== p. 86 ===

          probably incorrect. In order to avoid being justly accused of
          something similar, I will mention now that my mostimportant
     25   source was: O. Gingerich, “Did Copernicus owe a debt to
          Aristarchos?” in Journal
                                for the History of Astronomy 16, 1985.

          Give an analysis of the text “Why Not Dutch?” by answering
          questions 1-4. The assignment should be handed in at the next
          class meeting. In the following class meeting, the instructor
          will discuss the assignment; the students will receive individual comments on their assignments.

            1.   Which proposition(s) is (are) the bone of contention in
                 the text? Which roles do the parties in the dispute assume? Of which type is the dispute?
            2.   State precisely (by referring to line numbers) how the dialectical stages are represented in the text.
            3.   Give a schematic overview of the argumentation structure of paragraph 2-4. Explain why you think this is the
                 correct analysis. N.B. Unexpressed premises need only
                 be made explicit if they are supported by the author.
            4.   Make the unexpressed premise explicit in the following
                 argument:
            The proper place for acquiring knowledge of languages is at
          secondary school. After all, this is where a thorough instruction in foreign languages ought to be provided.

          WHY NOT DUTCH?
          Céline van Lier

          The University of Amsterdam has recently revealed a plan to
          give a quarter of all lectures in foreign languages. The university gives two reasons for this in its Public Development Plan
          IX: on the one hand, the opportunity is created for foreign students to follow a well-rounded programme in each of the Am-sterdam faculties and, on the other hand, it provides a
          broadening of education for Dutch students at the University
          of Amsterdam, as a result of which, their position on the international labor market will be strengthened. I do not believe,

=== p. 87 ===

however, that giving lectures in a foreign language is wise. I 10
think I can show that I have a strong case.
  Firstly, I am of the opinion that it is neither desirable nor
even necessary to make education more attractive to foreign
students. After all, it goes without saying that by attracting
large numbers of foreign students, the quality of education             15
will decline. The accessibility of education will be reduced
when this is followed (and given) in a language that is not the
native tongue of students and teachers. No one commands a
language quite as well as he does his native language and,
therefore, the transfer of knowledge will be impeded. In addi- 20
tion, most faculties already have to contend with an enormous
surplus of students.
  In addition to the question as to whether or not this will be
to the detriment of the quality of education, there is also the
question as to whether it is not possible at the moment for for- 25
eign students to follow a well-rounded programme. The answer to this question is yes; if, at least, they first follow a Dutch
course (provided entirely by the University of Amsterdam).
And it is better to maintain this situation. For what is more
just; that thousands of Dutch students have to put up with lec- 30
tures in a foreign language, or that a handful of foreign students have to take the trouble to learn the language of their
country of residence?
  Secondly, I believe that it is better to improve the competitive position of Dutch students in a different way. The proper 35
place for acquiring knowledge of languages is at secondary
school. After all, this is where a thorough instruction in foreign languages ought to be provided. If the universities start
teaching such basic skills, then the next obvious step is that
arithmetic and writing will also form part of the curriculum.           40
  To summarize, it can be said that giving lectures in foreign
languages will be to the advantage of no one. It is not
far-fetched to suppose that this plan is nothing more than a
prestige object for the University of Amsterdam. The fact that
no one hesitates to exclude our own Dutch language from the 45
university may be called astonishing. Did not Simon Stevin'
once say that the Dutch language in particular was eminently
suited to academic work?

  'Simon Stevin is a famous Dutch 16th-century mathematician.

=== p. 88 ===



=== p. 89 ===

Evaluation
    @

=== p. 90 ===



