=== chunk: eemeren-grootendorst-snoeck-henkemans-2002-argumentation-aep/ch7-fallacies-1 ===
title: Fallacies (1)
source_pdf: docs/sources/eemeren-grootendorst-snoeck-henkemans-2002-argumentation-aep/full.ocr.pdf
pdf_pages: 124-141
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 109
plan_page_end: 126
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 109 ===

                                    /
                      Fallacies (1)

                                   &

ESSENTIALS

               hen evaluating argumentative discourse, fallacies in the discourse must be detected. Fallacies are violations of the rules
               for critical discussion that prevent or hinder the resolution
ofa difference of opinion. They can occur during any of the discussion stages
and can be committed by either party. In the presentation of standpoints and
arguments, the following moves are among the fallacies that may threaten
the resolution process: (1) putting the opponent under pressure or attacking
him personally (violation of freedom rule), (2) evading or shifting the burden of proof (violation of burden-of-proof rule), (3) setting up a straw man
(violation of standpoint rule), (4) using irrelevant argumentation or rhetorical tricks (violation of relevance rule), and (5) denying or magnifying an
unexpressed premise (violation of unexpressed premise rule).

7.1   VIOLATIONS OF THE FREEDOM RULE

There are a variety of ways in which parties to a difference of opinion
can make resolution difficult or even impossible. This can happen
during any stage of the discussion. Parties do not always do this on

=== p. 110 ===

purpose. But each way of impeding the progress of the discussion
constitutes a violation of the discussion rules that must be followed
in order to successfully resolve a difference of opinion. Such violations of the discussion rules are known as fallacies.
  Violations are often difficult to spot. That is what is so treacherous
about fallacies. Strictly speaking, there can be a fallacy in discourse
only if the discourse is argumentative in nature, that is, if it is an attempt to resolve a difference of opinion. But not every discussion is
argumentative; a discussion may be purely informative or be intended to entertain. In case of doubt, it is advisable to treat a discourse as an argumentative discussion and assume that both parties
are willing to work toward a resolution of their difference of opinion
and will follow the rules for doing this.
  There are 10 rules that apply specifically to argumentative discussions. The first 5 rules pertain to how parties should put forward
their standpoints and arguments in order to work constructively toward a resolution of the difference of opinion. These rules are discussed in this chapter. The other 5 rules pertain to the argumentation
and the conclusion of the discussion. These rules are discussed in
chapter 8. Although observing these 10 rules does not guarantee that
the difference of opinion will be satisfactorily resolved, violating
them will surely prevent such a resolution. Fallacies can be identified
by referring to these rules.

Rule 1: Parties Must Not Prevent Each Other From Putting
Forward Standpoints or Casting Doubt on Standpoints

A difference of opinion can be satisfactorily resolved only if it is first
brought to light. To avoid interfering with this process, parties to a
discussion must give each other unlimited freedom to put forward
and to criticize standpoints and arguments. This requirement is
stated in Rule 1.
  Violations of Rule 1 sometimes occur during the confrontation
stage. The result is that the difference of opinion does not come to
light, or not completely, and therefore has no chance of being resolved. Rule 1 can be violated in two ways: by placing limits on the
standpoints or doubts that may be expressed, or by restricting a
party’s freedom of action.
  One way to limit the expression of standpoints and doubtsis to declare certain standpoints sacrosanct, or not open to question:

=== p. 111 ===

        I'm going to have the kitchen remodeled. We can discuss style
        and layout or anything you want, but not whether it will be
        done.

Another way of imposing limitations is to declare certain standpoints taboo:

        I don’t think you should say that Grandmother shouldn’t
        have remarried. One should not speak ill of the dead.

Restricting the other party’s freedom of action is an attempt to dismiss him as a serious party to the discussion. Two ways of doing this
are (a) to put him under pressure not to put forward a certain standpoint or objection or (b) to discredit him in the eyes of the public by
casting doubt on his expertise, integrity, or credibility.
  There are many ways to prevent a standpoint or an objection from
being presented. The most effective of these is, of course, to keep the
opponent out of the discussion by using physical force. Simply the
threat of violence or other sanctions may also be quite effective.
  Any threat that aims to restrict the other party from freely putting
forward his standpoint or criticism is called a fallacy of the stick (arqumentum ad baculum). Sometimes the threat is expressed very directly:
“If you try to get the city council to approve that, I will send my thugs
after you.” Usually it is done in a more subtle way. Indirect reference
may be made to unpleasant consequences for the other party if the
speaker does not get his way: “Of course you must make your own decision, but remember that we’re one of your top clients.” Or the
speaker may emphatically deny any intention of putting on pressure:
“I certainly wouldn’t want you to be influenced by the fact that I happen to be chair of the committee that will be evaluating your work.”
  Another effective way of putting pressure on the other party is to
play on his emotions: “How can you have given me a failing mark for
my thesis? I've worked onitnightand day.” Such a fallacious moveis
called an appeal to pity (arqgumentum ad misericordiam).
  In addition to threats, emotional blackmail, and other ways of restricting the other party’s moves, there are also ways to discredit
him. Presenting the other party to listeners as stupid, unreliable, biased, or otherwise unworthy of credibility is a way to make sure his
arguments will fall on deaf ears. It in effect denies him the right to
participate in the discussion by convincing the audience that there is
no use listening to him. In principle, personal characteristics of the
other party should not be brought into the discussion unless they

=== p. 112 ===

play a direct role in it, for example because the reliability of a witness
is under question.
  A personal attack is characterized by being directed not at the intrinsic merits of someone’s standpoint or doubt, but at the person itself. The traditional Latin name for this fallacy is arqumentum ad homi-nem. There are various kinds of personal attacks. One type is a direct
personal attack on the other party, which, because of its insulting nature, is called the abusive variant:

        It made me so drowsy to read his response in last week’s edition that I will not even take the trouble to reply to his musings. The man is weak in the head, and blessed are the
        innocent of spirit.

In a direct personal attack, what is being kicked is the person rather
than the ball. The impression is given that someone stupid or evil
could not possibly have a correct standpoint or a reasonable doubt.
Attackers hope in this way to be relieved of the obligation to give reasons for their criticism of the other party’s position.
  In the second type, suspicion is cast on the other party’s motives,
forexample by suggesting that the party has a personal interestin the
matter and is therefore biased. This is an indirect personal attack that is
known as the circumstantial variant. The following passage from a letter to the editor contains such an indirect personal attack:

        Marilyn French believes that men are the cause of the disadvantaged position of women and of environmental problems. I cannot avoid the impression that French must at some
        time in the past have washed the dirty socks of a man she did
        not love much, and therefore stopped thinking.

Inanindirect personal attack, someone’s opinionis claimed to derive
from suspect personal motives, and the arguments advanced are unmasked as rationalizations.
  In the third type of an argumentum ad hominem, an attempt is made
to undermine the other party’s credibility by pointing out a contradiction in that party’s words or deeds, for example a contradiction
between their opinions in the past and the present, or between what
they say and what they do. This type is called the you also variant (tu
quoque): You also do or think differently from what could reasonably
be expected. The following letter to the editor argues that there is a
contradiction between Mrs. Gardner’s opinions on the AFP test and
her own behavior:

=== p. 113 ===

         Mrs. A. Gardner discourages people from participating in the
         so-called AFP test, which measures the chances of a pregnant
         woman having a baby with spina bifida or Down’s syndrome.
         Mrs. Gardner knows all about the consequences of the AFP
         test. So why did she have such an AFP test done herself? Because in fact she preferred not to have a mongoloid baby?

The reasoning behind the you also variant is that anyone who is not
consistent cannot be right. Anyone who does not practice what he or
she preaches is, of course, being inconsistent. But this does not automatically mean that their standpoint is wrong. To be able to establish
the acceptability of the standpoint, the arguments must first be evaluated.
  Note that pointing outinconsistencies is a fallacy only if it is based
on inconsistency with a standpoint that the opponent has advanced
outside the discussion. If someone puts forward contradictory
standpoints or arguments in the course of the discussion, then it is
not a fallacy to point this out. On the contrary, identifying inconsistencies in the discussion itself is a necessary part of the evaluation.

7.2   VIOLATIONS OF THE BURDEN-OF-PROOF RULE

Rule 2: A Party Who Puts Forward a Standpoint Is Obliged
to Defend It if Asked to Do So

To resolve a difference of opinion, a person who puts forward a
standpoint must be prepared to defend this standpoint, and a person
who calls a standpoint into question must be prepared to assume the
role of antagonist. This latter requirement seldom poses a problem
because someone who voluntarily criticizes a standpoint can hardly
object to taking on the role of antagonist. However, not everyone
who expresses a standpoint is eager to actually defend it.
  Protagonists can be released from the obligation to defend their
standpoint if they have previously defended it successfully against
the same antagonist and if nothing has changed in either the starting
points or the discussion rules. In this case, the defense would be a
pointless repetition. Protagonists can also be released from the obligation to defend their standpoint if their opponents refuse to commit
themselves to anything and are not prepared to follow the rules. In
such a situation, it would be pointless to defend the standpoint because the necessary conditions for resolving the disagreement are
not met.

=== p. 114 ===

  Rule 2 is violated when someone tries to get out of the obligation to
defend a standpoint. If they getaway with it, the discussion will stagnate in the opening stage, in which it is determined who is protagonist and who is antagonist.
  The most drastic way to escape the obligation to defend your
standpoint is to shift the burden of proof onto the person criticizing
the standpoint: “You first prove that it isn’t so.” This is committing
the fallacy of shifting the burden of proof.
  In anonmixed difference of opinion, only one party puts forward a
standpoint, so there is only one party who has anything to defend. In
this case, shifting the burden of proof is entirely unjustified because
someone who criticizes a standpoint does not bear any burden of
proof. The antagonist is then being saddled with the role of protagonist of the opposite standpoint, even though the antagonist has not
advanced a standpoint at all. The following text gives a good example of the use of this trick in Holland, where viewers are obliged to
pay TV tax:

        The Minister of Cultural Affairs mentions “the successful
        hunt for TV tax evaders.” That is a good example of a fallacy.
        The hunt goes like this: on March 11 you receive a letter from
        the TV tax office that announces “A different look at your favorite program.” You read that your name and address are
        not in “our database” and since “these days nearly every
        home has a television,” you are asked to pay your TV tax. Let
        us assume that you are one of the few persons who have no
        time to watch TV or no interest in what TV has to offer. You
        haveno TV in your home. You would like to just throw away
        the unpleasant letter, but you can’t just do that. There is a
        form that you have to fill out stating that you have no TV.
        What the Minister of Cultural Affairs calls a “successful
        hunt” is a plain and simple shifting of the burden of proof.

In a mixed difference of opinion, the situation is more complicated.
Because both parties have advanced a standpoint, they each have an
obligation to defend their own standpoint. The only decision to be
made is in what order they should present their defenses.
  This problem of deciding the order of defense is often incorrectly
seen as a problem of choice. One party often attempts to lay the burden of proof at the door of the other party, usually the one who is attacking received wisdom, established opinion, traditional views, or
the existing state of affairs. The burden of proof then rests with the

=== p. 115 ===

party who wants to change the status quo; he or she must prove that
the proposed alternative is better. In the terminology of criminal law,
one can say that the status quo has the status of presumption. In the
following text this principle of presumption is appealed to:

       Supporters of the change are demanding that opponents
       show that reducing working hours would have undesirable
       consequences, such as reduced demand for labor or stagnation of the economy. But in fact, it is customary that supporters of a far-reaching measure (and reducing working hoursis
       indeed far-reaching) must show that such a measure will
       have a beneficial effect, rather than that the other side must
       show that it may have harmful consequences.

Applying the principle of presumption, however, must not result in
the burden of proof in a mixed dispute being assigned unilaterally to
one of the parties.
  Another criterion that can help decide the order in which standpoints are to be defended in mixed disputes is a principle known in
civil law as the principle of fairness. According to this principle, the
standpoint that is easiest to defend should be defended first. A legal
expert, Mr. Maarten Henket, once gave a good example of apportioning the burden of proof according to the principle of fairness:

       An example of an exception to the rule “He who makes a
       claim must prove it” can be found in alimony cases. Let us
       take the familiar situation of a woman who has a right to alimony from her ex-husband. The woman notices that her
       ex-husband’s income has gone up and wants more alimony.
       According to the rule just stated, she should have to prove
       that his income has risen. That is very difficult, in view of
       bank privacy and so on, and in practice the judge shifts the
       burden of proof to the husband: he must put his papers on the
       table and then it will be seen whether his income has gone up
       or not. This conflicts with the rule “He who makes a claim
       must prove it.”

The principle of presumption and the principle of fairness may help
in certain situations when deciding what order to follow, but a mixed
difference of opinion can never be completely resolved in an argumentative discussion unless both of the parties meet the obligation to
defend their standpoints. A subtle way to avoid the obligation to defend a standpoint is to present the standpoint as something that

=== p. 116 ===

needs no proof at all. The protagonist in this case is guilty of committing the fallacy of evading the burden of proof. A person commits this
fallacy when presenting the standpoint as something that is self-evident: “Itis obvious that...,” “Nobody in their right mind would deny
that ...,” “It goes without saying that ....” If this ploy works, antagonists may feel overwhelmed and fail to voice their doubts.
  The protagonist can sometimes achieve a similar effect by giving a
personal guarantee for the correctness of the standpoint: “I can as-sureyou that...,” “Thereis no doubtin my mind that ...,” “Iam absolutely convinced that ...,” “You can take it from me that ....”
  Another ploy for evading the burden of proof is to formulate the
standpoint in a way that amounts to making it immune to criticism be-causeit cannot be tested or evaluated. Examples of such hermetic formulations of standpoints are “Women are by nature possessive,” “Men are
basically hunters,” “The Frenchman is essentially intolerant,” and “The
youth of today are lazy.” These standpoints refer to “men,” “women,”
“the youth,” “the Frenchman,” avoiding quantifiers such as “all,”
“some,” “most,” or “the average.” Often, intangible (essentialistic) qualifications, such as “essentially,” “real,” “by nature,” are used as well. Because of the imprecise formulation, it is unclear how the standpoint in
question can be satisfactorily defended or refuted. How many examples or counterexamples are needed? If an attempt is made to refute the
standpoint “Women are by nature possessive” by citing one or more examples of women who are not possessive, the opponent will most likely
claim that these counterexamples are irrelevant because the women
cited in these examples are not “real” women or are not acting according to their “true nature.” All attempts at refutation thus bounce off an
armor of immunity.

7.3   VIOLATIONS OF THE STANDPOINT RULE

Rule 3: A Party’s Attack on a Standpoint Must Relate to the
Standpoint That Has Indeed Been Advanced by the Other Party

Rule 3 is violated when the standpoint attacked is not the standpoint
that was originally put forward by the protagonist. This causes a
shiftin the proposition with respect to which one party adopts a positive and the other party a neutral standpoint, so that in effect, and often without it being noticed, the difference of opinion becomes
multiple. If parties talk at cross purposes like this, it will be impossible for them to resolve the original disagreement. Even if the dis-

=== p. 117 ===

agreement seems to be resolved, it will be, at most, a spurious
resolution. What the one party seems to have successfully defended
is not the same as what the other party has attacked.
  Such shifts in standpoint can occur during any stage of the discussion. It may happen at the very beginning of the discussion, in the confrontation stage, if the antagonist’s criticism turns out to be directed at
a different standpoint than the one the protagonist has advanced. During the opening stage, the parties may be referring to a different proposition than the one that formed the starting point of the discussion in
the confrontation stage. During the argumentation stage, it may be
that the arguments of the protagonist and the antagonist relate to two
different propositions. In addition, the conclusion of the discussion
may be worded in such a way that it, in fact, relates to a proposition
somewhat different from the one in the original dispute.
  There are two different ways of attacking a standpoint that is not
really the one presented by the opponent. The original standpoint
can be misrepresented, or a fictitious standpoint can be attributed to
the opponent. In either case, the strategy is more likely to succeed
with an audience that does not know exactly what the opponent’s
original standpoint was.
  Parties who misrepresent the opponent’s standpoint or attribute a
fictitious standpoint to him or her commit the fallacy of the straw
man. Inboth cases, they plan their attack by taking the path of least resistance: They attribute to their opponent a standpoint that can be attacked more easily. By distorting their opponent’s standpoint, they
set up a straw man that they can easily knock down. In the most extreme case, the standpoint attacked does not show any resemblance
to the original standpoint, but sometimes the two standpoints differ
only in details.
  One of the techniques for attributing a fictitious standpoint to the
other party is to emphatically put forward the opposite standpoint. If
someone says firmly, “I personally believe the defense of our democracy is of great importance,” she thereby suggests that her opponent
thinks otherwise. If the opponent does not hasten to declare that he
toois a great champion of democracy, he immediately draws on himself the suspicion that he does not support democracy.
  Another way of attributing a fictitious standpoint to the opponent
is to refer to a group to which the opponent belongs and to link that
group with the fictitious standpoint:

        She says that she thinks this research is useful, but as a business person she naturally sees it as a waste of money.

=== p. 118 ===

Here the speaker implies that it is obvious what this group (business
people) thinks about this matter and that what applies to the group
applies to all individual members of the group.
  In a third technique, not only the standpoint is fictitious, but the
opponent too. By using expressions such as “Nearly everyone thinks
that ...,” “Educators are of the opinion that ...,” and “Everyone has
been saying lately that ...,” it is not stated who actually holds the
standpoint being attacked. There is no reference made to surveys,
opinion polls, or other evidence that there really are people who adhere to the standpoint.
  When the opponent’s standpoint is misrepresented, it is presented
in a way that makes it more difficult to defend, or even untenable or
ridiculous. This is often achieved by taking a standpoint out of context, by oversimplifying it, or by exaggerating it, as in the following
complaint:

       The result is very discouraging because of the way he goes
       about things: quoting some sentences completely out of context, suggesting meanings that aren’t there, and finally, with
       several well-chosen exaggerations—which aren’t there either—making the prey ripe for his omniscient and omnivorous voracity. I find this a superficial way of discussing
       academic work.

Exaggerating a standpoint by generalizing it may be accomplished
by leaving out quantifiers like “some” and “a few” and replacing
them with “all.” The resulting standpoint is much easier to attack. If
you are defending the standpoint that some men are oversensitive,
your job is done as soon as you have given a couple of examples of
oversensitive men. Defending the standpoint that “all” men are
oversensitive is naturally much more difficult; your opponent has
only to give one example of an insensitive man to show that your
standpoint is untenable.
  Techniques often used in simplifying standpoints are to leave out
nuances and restrictions. A good example of the firstis accusing someone of having written that homeopaths are charlatans, whereas what
the person had actually written was that homeopaths are a group “in
which the line between legitimate and charlatan is very fuzzy.”
  If the original formulation of the disputed standpoint can be consulted, it is possible to verify whether it has been represented accurately. This is difficult if the original formulation is not available.
Sometimes, however, the representation is so improbable that it is

=== p. 119 ===

immediately suspect. An example of such a suspect representation of
astandpoint occursin a Senator’s response to a Deputy Health Secretary’s argumentation for his plans to promote sports as leisure-time
pursuits:

        The first argument, whose unsoundness is obvious, has to do
        with the costs of health care. The Deputy Secretary is afraid
        that parts of the body that are little used will quickly become
       brittle or fall off, after which the help of the medical establishment—charging for a single day what an average person
        earns in a month—will be needed. Since sports trainers are
        cheaper than surgeons, health care costs can be reduced if
        more people participate in sports.

In other cases, it helps to watch out for certain signals in the way the
standpoint is represented. Some skepticism is called for when the
speaker too emphatically proclaims the opponent’s standpoint:
“Clearly the author is of the opinion that ...,” “The author obviously
assumes that...” Although the formulations suggest otherwise, it often turns out that the standpoint proclaimed was not the author’s
standpoint.

7.4   VIOLATIONS OF THE RELEVANCE RULE

Rule 4: A Party May Defend His or Her Standpoint Only
by Advancing Argumentation Related to That Standpoint

Rule 4 places two minimum requirements on the defense of standpoints: The defense must be conducted by means of arguments, and
those arguments must be genuinely relevant to the standpoint being
defended. If the antagonist fails to notice that these requirements
have not been met, he or she may end up accepting the standpoint on
the basis of an irrelevant argument. In this case, the difference of
opinion has not really been resolved.
  Violations of Rule 4 occur during the argumentation stage. There
are two kinds of violations. The first is when the argumentation has
no relation whatsoever to the standpoint that was advanced in the
confrontation stage. This is a case of irrelevant argumentation. The second kind of violation is when a standpoint is defended with means
other than argumentation, while at the same time the protagonist
acts as though he or she were providing argumentation. Thisis called
non-argumentation.

=== p. 120 ===

  Irrelevant argumentation, in fact, defends a standpoint thatisnot
the standpoint that caused the difference of opinion. Just as in the
case of the straw man, there is a shift in the proposition to which the
standpoint relates. But in the case of irrelevant argumentation, it is
the protagonist who distorts his or her own standpoint. Instead of
making it easier to attack, the shift is intended to make the standpoint easier to defend. Then the fallacy is committed of putting forward argumentation relevant only to a standpoint that is not the one at
issue, whichis better known as ignoratio elenchi. Here is an example:

        Amateur sports are being ruined by all the alcohol that is sold
        at sports canteens, because research shows that 85% of all
        sports canteens sell alcohol.

At first sight the argument and the standpoint seem to be related, but
actually the argument (alcohol is sold in 85% of all sports canteens)
does not support the standpoint that “amateur sports are being ruined by all the alcohol that is sold at sports canteens.” The argument
would, however, support a different standpoint: “Itis easy to buy alcohol in sports canteens.”
  When non-argumentation is used, it is not usually for the purpose
of convincing the other party, but of winning over a third party. Instead of putting forward argumentation to support the standpoint at
issue, the protagonist plays on the emotions, sentiments or biases of
the intended audience. If we use the classical categories of means of
persuasion—Iogos, ethos, and pathos—we could say that pathos takes
the place of logos here. That is why playing on the emotions of the audience is called a pathetic fallacy.
  Pathetic fallacies generally thrive in public discussions about
which many people have strong feelings. In such situations, whoever
most successfully manipulates the (positive or negative) feelings of
the audience has the best chance of having a standpoint accepted. Examples of positive emotions that can be appealed to are feelings of security or loyalty. Examples of negative emotions that can be
appealed to are fear, greed, and shame. The following letter to the editor accuses one of the participants in a discussion on anti-terrorism
of playing on people’s sentiments:

        When Mr. Carter talks about innocent women and children
        who have been victims of terrorism, he is playing unfairly on
        the sentiments of the members of the jury. Because in fact itis
        just as terrible a thing when the victims are men, whether
        they are ordinary men, police agents, or soldiers.

=== p. 121 ===

Appeals to prejudices and emotions are not normally presented as if they
were arguments. It often suffices to emphasize in an emotional way the
significance of certain interests or values. The audience itself will make
the desired connection between these and the standpoint at issue.
  In addition to the rhetorical means of persuasion pathos, a protagonist may also make use of ethos. Aristotle believed this means to be
the most effective. Speakers use ethos when they attempt to decide
the difference of opinion in their favor on the strength of their own
expertise or good character. They attempt to increase the audience’s
faith in their expertise, credibility, or integrity, so that the audience
will simply take their word for the standpoint’s acceptability. If a
protagonist has a particularly strong ethos, he or she may not need to
present any defense at all for the standpoint.
  In itself, there is nothing wrong with making use of ethos. In many
cases, thereisno other choice than to accept something on the authority of experts. Certain topics require so much specialized knowledge
thatlaypeople cannotindependently verify them. In other instances,
the protagonist may be the only witness to a certain event or the only
one who can verify the accuracy of a certain statement. Examples of
this are statements about the speaker’s own mood or physical
well-being. There is nothing wrong with depending on someone
else’s judgment in such cases, but it is important to realize that a difference of opinion cannot really be resolved in this way because it is
left to the expert to settle the dispute.
  Something to watch out for, however, is when a person who claims
to have expertise does not actually possess it or when the expertise is
not relevant to the matter at hand. Then the ethical fallacy of abuse of authority is committed (which is on a par with the fallacy that is traditionally known as arqumentum ad verecundiam). An example of thisis when
someone suggests, without providing actual argumentation, that he
or she possesses the required amount of expertise on the basis of being
a professor and proceeds to make statements about the dangers of nuclear energy, when in fact his field of expertise is Egyptology.

7.5   VIOLATIONS OF THE UNEXPRESSED PREMISE RULE

Rule 5: A Party May Not Falsely Present Something as a Premise
That Has Been Left Unexpressed by the Other Party or Deny
a Premise That He or She Has Left Implicit

Violations of Rule 5 are related to the fact that in everyday language,
all kinds of things are implied or are expressed only indirectly.

=== p. 122 ===

Parties to a discussion of course should not try to take improper advantage of implicit or indirect language. That is what happens when
the antagonist attacks the protagonist by producing a reconstruction
of the unexpressed premise that goes further than what the protagonist can actually be held to. Exaggerating the unexpressed premise
makes the standpoint easier to attack, and the fallacy is called magnifying what has been left unexpressed. Protagonists can violate Rule 5 by
refusing to accept commitment to an unexpressed premise implied
by their own defense, thereby committing the fallacy of denying an
unexpressed premise.
   Violations of Rule 5 occur during the argumentation stage. The result is that the difference of opinion cannot be brought to resolution
because parties deny their commitments or put words in each other’s
mouth. Rule 5 essentially means that protagonists can be held to
nothing they are not really committed to and to everything they really are committed to.
   The fallacy of magnifying an unexpressed premise consists of adding an unexpressed premise that goes beyond whatis warranted and
attributing a premise to the protagonist that goes beyond the commitments created by the protagonist’s defense. In the following example, Heather commits this fallacy:

      Jerome:   Itcouldbethathedoesn’tlike dogsvery much, because
                he has a cat.
      Heather: So you think that everyone who has a cat by definition
                hates dogs?
      Jerome:   No, Ididn’t say that. I only mean that there are a lot of
                cat owners who don’t much like dogs.

Given the cautious way Jerome has formulated his standpoint (“It
could be ...”), it is incorrect to attribute to him the unexpressed
premise that everyone who has a cat by definition hates dogs. Furthermore, “not liking dogs much” is not the same as “hating dogs.” In
thisrespectas well, Heather has exaggerated what Jerome left unexpressed.
   Speakers commit the fallacy of denying an unexpressed premise if
they refuse responsibility for elements that are indeed implied by
their defense. If the opponent correctly makes explicit something
thatisimplied by the protagonist’s argumentation, then the protagonist commits a fallacy by denying it. By hiding behind the claim “I
never said that,” the protagonist stands in the way of true resolution
of the disagreement.

=== p. 123 ===

  The inclination to deny unexpressed premises is strongest when
they contain weak or controversial elements. The following is a good
example:

        I have nothing against homosexuals. I just think that the age
        of consent for homosexual sex should not be lowered, because of the danger that young boys would be pushed into becoming homosexuals.

The use of the word “danger” is clear evidence that the speaker does
not really have the tolerant attitude claimed in the first sentence: The
unexpressed premise in this argumentation is that homosexuality is
something that should be prevented if at all possible.

FURTHER READING

An influential historical study of fallacies is C. L. Hamblin, Fallacies,
London: Methuen, 1970, reprinted by Vale Press, Newport News, VA.
A formally oriented approach to the fallacies is also taken in J. Woods
and D. Walton, The Logic of the Fallacies, Toronto: McGraw-Hill:
Ryerson, 1982. The pragma-dialectical approach to the fallacies is explained in F. H. van Eemeren and R. Grootendorst, Argumentation,
Communication, and Fallacies: A Pragma-Dialectical Perspective,
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1992, chapters 8-19. An
overview of the state of the art in the study of the fallacies is provided
by F. H. van Eemerenin F. H. van Eemeren (Ed.), Crucial Concepts in Argumentation Theory, Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2001,
chapter 6.

=== p. 124 ===

EXERCISES

  1.   Which of the following statements lend themselves, due to the
       fact that they are not falsifiable, to evasion of the burden of
       proof?
            Americans are racists.
       o    Americans are essentially racists.
            People are bad.
       a0   Cathy is bad.
            Cathy cheats the social services.
       -0   Doctors cheat the social services.
  2.   Do the following passages contain a violation of a discussion
       rule? If so, which fallacy has occurred?
       a.   Martin Woolacott advocates the use of force against Iraq on
            the pretext that “the alternative, if it is to let Saddam prevail, is worse.” In fact Saddam Hussein and his regime are
            essential for the stability and unity of Iraq. Notwithstanding his demonization in the West, his military regime, to
            many Iraqis, remains synonymous with a united Iraq. If
            Saddam has done anything positive for his country, it has
            been to foster a sense of national pride and unity, which
            even the UN-led economic sanctions and U.S.-encouraged
            Kurds’ rebellion in northern Iraq have failed to destroy.
            Should the West decide to remove Saddam by destroying
            his military and political structure, it should be ready to
            face the consequences: namely the possible break-up of
            Iraq. This would, in all probability, mean something like
            Lebanon of the 1980s or Somalia of the 1990s.
            I share Catherine Bennett’s concern about Jeffrey Archer
            ending up as a serious candidate for Mayor of London, but
            not because of his fictional past, his questionable financial
            dealings, or even the quality of his writing—mnone of which
            disqualified other Tory politicians in the past 18 years. It is
            his politics that worry me.
            The project engineer says that Thompson is more qualified
            than I am to work on her project. But did you know that
            Thompson is engaged to her daughter?
            Capital punishment should be introduced in this country.
            You do want your children to live in a safe neighborhood,
            don’t you?

=== p. 125 ===

     e.   To the Editor:
          I take issue with your July 23 editorial “Hamptons Serenade,” in which you describe the rich as shallow and undeserving.
             I have a close friend who is a multimillionaire with a
          house in the Hamptons. We began in graduate school together in 1960. He dropped out of the Ph.D. program and
          went to work at an investment bank for $50 a week, while I
          got my Ph.D.
             Now I make $75,000 a year, and he makes millions.
          WheneverIvisitmy friend, I feel nothing but pride in his accomplishment, and I feel good about knowing him.
             I don’t feel that wealth is “disorienting” or “strangely
          dislocating.” I feel thatIlive in a great and free country—so
          free that a young guy like my friend who had no connections can end up a great success.
3.   The following argument was given by a trade union against setting up a union for prostitutes in the Netherlands: “We are opposed to prostitution because it exploits women and we cannot,
     therefore, regard it as a profession.” To which of the following interpretations of this argument can the union be held committed?
     a.   The exploitation of women is wrong.
     b.   Something in which exploitation is involved cannot be a
          profession.
     c.   Exploitation is wrong.
4.   Which variants of the argumentum ad hominem occur in the passage given below from a column by the Dutch writer Gerrit
     Komrij? If necessary, follow the strategy of maximally argumentative interpretation.
          Why the outcry over apartheid is so vehement in the Nether-lands, of all places, is something that continues to amaze me.
     After all, no other country is itself so held together by apartheid. With a high and mighty attitude, the Dutch condemn a
     system which in their own country is an obsession. The passion
     for parochialism rages through institutions; everyone tries frenetically to preserve, to consolidate and to give preference to
     their own territory. However, as soon as the same thing happens in a far-away country, then it is regarded as the height of
     contemptibility. The Dutch fume with rage about the
     evil-smelling activities of others, while passing one foul wind
     after the other in their own back yard.

=== p. 126 ===

  5.   Think of a response to the following statements in which the
       burden of proof is evaded or shifted, a direct or indirect personal attackis launched, or thereis a tu quoque or an ad baculum.
       a.   Wife to husband: “You don’t know how to manage money.”
       b.   Aunt to nephew who is studying psychology: “I really do wonder whether it is true that everything is due to sex.”
       C.   Child to parents: “1 am perfectly capable of looking after myself.”
       d. Antique dealer to customer: “You deliberately dropped that
            vase.”
  6.   Are discussion rules violated in the following excerpts? If so,
       which fallacy has been committed?
       a.   Many people are hurt terribly by little things we call “social slights.” It is a well-known psychological fact that the
            people who become offended the easiest have the lowest
            self-esteem.
            Alice: You shouldn’t take books from my bookshelf without asking, and then lend them to someone else.
            Betty: Idid not take books out of your bookshelf, let alone
            lend any of your books to anyone else.
            Alice: Well, the books aren’t on the bookshelf. YOU tell ME
            where they are.
            It is a fact that ulcers are not the result of what we ate, but
            what’s eating us.
            Asked what steps Russia would take if Ukraine and the Bal-tic states of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania were invited to
            join NATO, Mr. Yeltsin said he hoped the West would be
            “realistic” enough not to do it. “In NATO expansion, there
            is a red line for Russia which should not be crossed. Otherwise European stability might not withstand the new tension,” he said.
            May I make it clear that the quotations attributed to me in your
            article about Pope John Paul’s document on the protection of
            the Catholic faith were off-the-cuff remarks. I gave them to
            your correspondent as general briefing. I explained thatIcould
            not comment on the document itself until I had read it. The
            quotations therefore do not represent either my own considered opinion on the matter or that of the paper I edit.

