=== chunk: dennett-1991-consciousness-explained/ch10-show-and-tell ===
title: Show and Tell
source_pdf: docs/sources/dennett-1991-consciousness-explained/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 300-335
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 285
plan_page_end: 320
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 285 ===

                                             SHOW AND TELL

     1. ROTATING IMAGES IN THE MIND'S EYE

      The first challenge, before we tackle the philosophical thought
experiments, comes from some real experiments that might seem to
rehabilitate the Cartesian Theater. Some of the most exciting and ingenious research in cognitive science in the last twenty years has been
on the human ability to manipulate mental images, initiated by the
psychologist Roger Shepard's (Shepard and Metzler, 1971) classic study
of the speed of mental rotation of figures such as these.

     The subjects in the original experiment were shown such pairs of
line drawings and asked whether or not the pair are different views of

=== p. 286 ===

 the same shape. In this case, as you can quickly determine, the answer
 is yes. How did you do it? A typical answer is "I rotated one of the
 images in my mind's eye, and superimposed it on the other." Shepard
 varied the angular rotation distances between pairs of figures — some
 pairs were only a few degrees out of alignment, and others required
 large rotations to put them into alignment — and measured the time it
 took subjects to respond, on average, to the different displays. Supposing that something like a process of actual rotation of an image in
 the brain takes place, it should take roughly twice as long to rotate a
 mental image through 90 degrees as through 45 degrees (if we ignore
 acceleration and deceleration, keeping rotation speed constant).' Shep-ard's data bore out this hypothesis remarkably well, over a wide variety
 of conditions. Hundreds of subsequent experiments, by Shepard and
 many others, have explored the behavior of the image-manipulation
 machinery of the brain in great detail, and — to put the still-controversial consensus as gingerly as possible — there does seem to
 be what the psychologist Stephen Kosslyn (1980) calls a "visual buffer"
 in the brain, which performs transformations by processes which are
 strongly "imagistic" — or, to use Kosslyn's term, quasi-pictorial.
       What does this mean? Have cognitive psychologists discovered
 that the Cartesian Theater exists after all? According to Kosslyn, these
experiments show that images are assembled for internal display in
 much the way that images on a CRT (a cathode ray tube such as a
television screen or computer monitor) can be created from files in a
computer memory. Once they are on the internal screen, they can be
rotated, searched, and otherwise manipulated by subjects who are given
particular tasks to perform. Kosslyn stresses, however, that his CRT
model is a metaphor. This should remind us of Shakey's metaphorical
"image manipulation" talents. Certainly Shakey had no Cartesian Theater in its computer-brain. To get a somewhat clearer picture of what
must actually happen in a human brain, we can start with a nonmeta-phorical model, much too strong to be true, and then "subtract" the
undesirable properties from the model one by one. In other words, we
will take Kosslyn's CRT metaphor, and gradually introduce the limitations on it.
      First, consider a system that really does manipulate real images,

       1. This useful oversimplification is one of the many wrinkles that have subsequently been explored by researchers, and there is now considerable evidence for "inertia' and               effects in image transformations. See Freyd (1989).

=== p. 287 ===

such as the computer graphics systems that are now proliferating in
hundreds of settings: computer animation for television and films, systems that render three-dimensional objects in perspective views for
architects and interior decorators, video games, and many more. Engineers call their versions CAD systems, for computer-aided design.
CAD systems are revolutionizing engineering not only because they
make drafting vastly easier in the way word processors make writing
easier, but because engineers can readily solve problems and answer
questions with them that would otherwise be quite difficult. Faced with
the Shepard problem in Figure 10.1, an engineer could answer the
question with the aid of a CAD system by putting both images on the
CR1 screen and literally rotating one of the images and then trying to
superimpose it on the other. A few details of the process are important.
      Each pictured object would be entered into the computer memory
as a virtual three-dimensional object, by breaking it down into a description of its planes and edges defined by their xyz coordinates, each
occupied point in virtual space being an "ordered triple" of numbers
stored in the computer's memory. The point of view of the implied
 observer would also be entered as a point in the same virtual space,
 defined by its own xyz coordinate triple. Here is a diagram of a cube
 and a point of view, but it is important to remember that the only thing
 the computer has to store is the triples for each crucial point, grouped
 into larger groups (e.g., one for each face of the cube), together with
 coded information for the various properties of each face (its color,

           (0,0,0)

=== p. 288 ===

 whether or not it is opaque or transparent, its texture, and so forth).
 Rotating one of the objects and then shifting it in the virtual space can
 be readily computed, by simply adjusting all the x, y, and z coordinates
 of that object by constant amounts — simple arithmetic. Then it is a
 matter of straightforward geometry to calculate the sight lines that determine which planes of the object would then be visible from the
 virtual point of view, and exactly how they would appear. The calculations are straightforward but laborious or "compute intensive,"
 especially if smooth curves, shading, reflected light, and texture are to
 be calculated as well.
       On advanced systems, different frames can be calculated rapidly
 enough to create apparent motion on the screen, but only if the representations are kept quite schematic. "Hidden line removal," the computational process that renders the final image opaque in the right
places and prevents a Shepard cube from looking like a transparent
Necker cube, is itself a relatively time-consuming process, which more
or less sets the limits on what can be produced "in real time." For the
gorgeously detailed image transformations by computer graphics that
we see on television every day, the image-generation process is much
slower, even on supercomputers, and the individual frames have to be
stored for later display at the higher speeds that satisfy the motion-detection requirements of the human visual system.2

        I                      H
                           Before and after hidden line removal.
      These thTee-d imensional virtual-object manipulators are magnificent new tools or toys, and they really are something new under the
sun, not an electronic copy of something we already have in our heads.
It is quite certain that no process analogous to these trillions of geometrical and arithmetical calculations occurs in our brains when we

       2. The impressive, but noticeably jerky, animation in the popular IBM.PC program,
"Flight Simulator. displays the limits of real-time animation of fairly complex three-dimensional scenes by a small computer.

=== p. 289 ===

engage in mental imagery, and nothing else could yield the richly detailed animated sequences they produce — for the reasons we explored
in chapter 1.
      We can satisfy ourselves that this limit on our brains is real by
considering a slightly different Shepard-style problem that would be
quite easy to solve with the aid of such a CAD system: Would the "red"
X on one face of this object be visible to someone looking through the
square hole in its front wall?

      Our Shepard object with the X is a simple, schematic object, and
since the question we want to answer is independent of texture, illumination, and other such niceties, it would be quite easy for an engineer
to produce an animated rotation of this object on the CRT. He could
then rotate the image every which way, moving the point of view back
and forth — and just look for a glimpse of red through the hole. If he
sees red, the answer is yes, otherwise, no.
       Now, can you perform the same experiment in your mind's eye?
Can you simply rotate the object shown and peer through the hole? If
you can, you can do something I can't do, and all the people I have
asked are also unable to do it with any confidence. Even those who
 have an answer to the question are quite sure that they didn't just get
 it by rotating and looking. (They often say they first tried rotating and
 looking and found it doesn't work; they can "rotate it" but then it "falls
 apart" when they try to look through the       Then they talk of "drawing in" sightlines through the hole on the unrotated image, to see if
 they could tell where the lines would hit the back plane.) Since our
 Shepard object is no more complex than the objects apparently successfully rotated in many experiments, this poses a puzzle: What kind
 of a process can so readily perform some transformations (and then
 extract information from the result), and fall down so badly on other

=== p. 290 ===

 operations that are apparently no more demanding? (If these operations
 appear to us to be no more demanding, we must be looking at them
 from the wrong vantage point, since our failures demonstrate that they
 are more demanding.)
      An experiment by the psychologists Daniel Reisberg and Deborah
 Chambers (forthcoming) raises much the same question. Subjects who
 claimed to be good imagers were shown "nonsense" shapes and asked
 to rotate them mentally by 90 or 180 degrees in their mind's eyes and
 then report what they "saw." They were surprised to discover that they
 could not recognize, with their mind's eyes, what you can readily recognize when you turn the book clockwise 90 degrees to look at these
 figures.

                   /
                                                                    T

                        I                                       I

     The sorts of questions engineers use CAD systems to answer are
typically not as simple as "Is the red X visible through the hole?"
 Usually they concern more complicated spatial properties of objects
 being designed, such as "Will this three-jointed robot arm be able to
 reach around and adjust the knob on the robot's back without bumping
 into the power supply pack?" or even aesthetic properties of such objects, such as "What will the stairway in this hotel lobby look like to
 someone walking by on the street, looking through the plate-glass windows?" When we try to visualize such scenes unaided, we get only the
sketchiest and most unreliable results, so a CAD system can be seen as
a sort of                          (Dennett, 1982d, 1990b). It vastly amplifies the imagining powers of a human being, but it does depend on
the user's having normal vision — for looking at the CRT.
       Now let's try to imagine a more ambitious prosthetic device: a
CAD system for blind engineers! And, to keep it simple, let's suppose
that the sorts of questions these blind engineers want to answer are of
the relatively straightforward, geometric sort — not subtle questions
about the aesthetics of architecture. The output will have to be in some
nonvisual form, of course. The most user-friendly form would be ordinary language answers (in Braille or voice-synthesized) to ordinary

=== p. 291 ===

language questions. So we will suppose that when confronted with
                                                                     a
question of the sort we have just been considering, the blind engineer
would simply pass the sentence on to the CAD system (in terms it can
 "understand," of course) and wait for the CAD system to provide the
answer.
       Our Mark I CADBLIND system is inelegant, but straightforward.
It consists of an ordinary CAD system, complete with CRT, in front
                                                                                of
which is perched a Vorsetzer, a   computer   vision  system,    complete     with
TV camera aimed at the CRT and robot fingers to twiddle the knobs of
the CAD system.3 Unlike Shakey, whose CRT was only for the benefit
of bystanders. this system really does "look at" an image, a real
                                                                            image
made of glowing phosphor       dots, which  radiates   real light    of  different
frequencies onto the light-sensitive transducers at the back of the TV
camera. When posed our red X Shepard problem. the Mark I CADBLIND
 produces an image with a real red X on it, visible to all, including the
TV camera of the Vorsetzer.
        Let us suppose. without further ado, that the Vorsetzer has solved
 within it enough of the problems of computer vision to be able to extract
 the sought-for information from the representations glowing on the CRT
 screen. (No, I am not going on to claim that the Vorsetzer is conscious —
 I )ust want to suppose that it is good enough at doing
                                                               what it does to
 be able to answer the questions the blind      engineer    poses    for it.) The
 Mark I CADBLJ.ND makes and manipulates         real  images,    and   uses them
                                             the  questions     that    a sighted
 to answer, for the blind engineer, all
 engineer could answer using an ordinary     CAD    system.  If  the  Mark!    system is that good, then the Mark II will be      child's  play    to  design:   We
  just throw away the CRT and the TV     camera    looking   at  it, and   replace
  them with a simple cable! Through this cable the CAD system sends
  the Vorsetzer the bit-map, the array of zeros and ones that defines the
  image on the CRT. In the Mark I's Vorsetzer, this bit-map was
                                                                              pain.
  stakingly reconstructed from   the outputs  of  the  optical   transducers     in
  the camera.
         There are scant savings in computation in the Mark II— just the
  elimination of some unnecessary hardware. All the elaborate calculation of sight lines, hidden line removal, and the rendering of texture.

         3. I call this device a Vorsetzer because it reminds me of the
                                                                            wonderful German
 player-piano by that name, which consisted of a separate unit with eighty-Bight
                                                                                    the outside.
 that could "sit before" an ordinary piano, depressing the keys and pedals from
      like  a human    pianist. (It is important to recognize that this device is a Vorsetzer—
 lust
 a sitter-before — but not a Vorsitzer — a chairman or president!)

=== p. 292 ===

  shadows, and reflected light, which took so much computation in the
  Mark I, is still a part of the process. Suppose the Vorsetzer in the Mark
  if is called upon to make a depth judgment by comparing texture gradients, or interpreting a shadow. It will have to analyze the patterns
  of bits in the relevant portions of the bit-map to arrive at discriminations
  of the textures and shadows.
        This means that the Mark II is still a ridiculously inefficient machine, for if the information that a particular portion of the bit-map
  should represent a shadow is already "known" to the CAD system (if
  this is part of the coded description of the object from which the CAD
  system generates its images), and if that fact is part of what the Vorsetzer
  must determine in order to make its depth judgment, why doesn't the
  CAD system just tell the Vorsetzer? Why bother rendering the shadow
  for the benefit of the pattern-analyzers in the Vorsetzer, when the task
  of pattern-rendering and the task of pattern-analyzing cancel each other
 out?
        So our Mark Ill CADBLIND will exempt itself from huge computational tasks of image-rendering by taking much of what it "knows"
 about the represented objects and passing it on to the Vorsetzer subsystem directly, using the format of simple codes for properties, and
 attaching "labels" to various °places" on the bit-map array, which is
 thereby turned from a pure image into something like a diagram. Some
 spatial properties are represented directly — shown — in the (virtual)
 space of the bit-map, but others are only told about by
       This should remind us of my claim in chapter 5 that the brain
 only has to make its discriminations once; a feature identified doesn't
have to be redisplayed for the benefit of a master appreciator in the
Cartesian Theater.
       But now we can see a different aspect of the engineering: "canceling out" only works if the systems that need to communicate can
"speak the same language." What if the format in which the CAD system
already "knows" the relevant information — e.g., the information that
something is a shadow — is not a format in which the Vorsetzer can
"use" the                  Then for communication to take place it might

       4. Once we have labels, we can tell about any properties of
                                                                    the object, not just
spatial properties or visible properties — as the old coloring-book jokes: "Here my
boss. Color him obnoxious."
       5. See Kosslyn (1980) for a discussion of format. Jackendoff (1989)
                                                                           has a related
analysis of what he calls the form of information structures.

=== p. 293 ===

be necessary    to "step back in order to jump forward." It might be
necessary for the systems to engage in inforinationally profligate — you
might say longwinded — interactions in order to interact at all. Think
of sketching a map to give directions to a foreigner, when all he
                                                                         needs
to know — if only you knew how to say it in            his  tongue —  is "Turn
left at the next traffic light." Going to all the trouble of making something
like an image is often practically necessary, even when it's not necessary
"in principle."
       Since the systems in our brains are the products of several overlaid
histories of opportunistic tinkering, the long history of natural selection
and the short history of individual redesign-by-self-manipulations we
should expect to find such inefficiencies. Resides, there are other rea-the
sons for rendering information in imagelike formats (in addition to
sheer pleasure of it), which,   if we stumble  over   them   serendipitously,
will soon impress us as making images worth the trouble in any case.
As we already noted, in the speculations in chapter 7 about "diagramming to yourself," such transformations of format are often highly
effective ways of extracting information that is otherwise all but inextricable from the data. Diagrams do indeed amount to re-presentations
 of the information — not to an inner eye, but to an inner
                                                                       pattern-recognition mechanism that can also accept input from               a   regular
 ("outer"?) eye. That is why the techniques of (computer)         graphics    are
 so valuable in science, for instance. They permit huge arrays        of  data to
                                                    pattern-recognition       ca-be presented in a format that lets the superb
 pabilities of human vision take charge. We make graphs and maps and
 all manner of color-coded plottings so that the sought-for
                                                                   regularities
 and saliencies will just "pop out" at us, thanks to      our  visual  systems.
 Diagrams don't just help us see patterns that      might    otherwise    be imperceptible; they can help us keep track of  what   is relevant, and   remind
  us to ask the right questions at the right times. The Swedish Al
                                                                               re-has argued  that  such  image  generation
  searcher Lars-Erik Janlert (1985)
  and perusal in a computer can also be used to help solve otherwise
  intractable problems of what we might call Inference-management in
  systems that are "in principle" purely deductive engines. (For a different slant on the same process, see Larkin and Simon, 1987.)
        This tactic is certainly well known to many wily thinkers, and
  has been wonderfully described by one of the wiliest ever, the
                                                                       physicist
  Richard Feynmann, in Surely Youre Joking, Mr.         Feynmann'     (1985).   In
                                                of  Tools,"   he  tells  how    he
  a chapter aptly entitled "A Different Box
   amazed his fellow graduate students at Princeton by "intuiting" the

=== p. 294 ===

  truth and falsity of the arcane theorems of topology, theorems he was
  utterly unable to derive formally or even fully comprehend:

           I had a scheme, which I still use today when somebody is
                                                                               explaining something that I'm trying to understand: I keep making
        up examples. For instance, the mathematicians would come in
        with a terrific theorem, and they're all excited. As they're telling
        me the conditions of the theorem, I construct something which
       fits all the conditions. You know, you have a set (one ball) —
       disjoint (two balls). Then the balls turn colors, grow hairs, or
       whatever, in my head as they put more conditions on. Finally
       they state the theorem, which is some dumb thing about the ball
       which isn't true for my hairy green ball thing, so I say, "False!"
          If it's true, they get all excited, and I let them go on for a while.
       Then I point out my counterexample.
          "Oh. We forgot to tell you that it's Class 2 Hausdorff homo-morphic."
          "Well, then," I say, "It's trivial! it's trivial!" By that time I know
       which way it goes, even though I don't know what Hausdorif
       homomorphic means. [pp. 85—86]

      Such tactics "come naturally" to some extent, but they have to be
 learned or invented, and some people are much better at it than others.
Those in whom these skills are highly developed have different virtual
machines in their brains, with significantly different powers, compared
with those who are infrequent or inept "visualizers." And the differences readily emerge in their individual heterophenomenological
worlds.
      So there is good reason to believe, as Kosslyn and others have
argued, that human beings put their vision systems to work not only
by presenting themselves with real, external images (as on the CAD
system's CRT) but also with idiosyncratically designed internal virtual
images or diagramlike data representations that are the suitable raw
material for some later stage or stages of the visual-processing machinery.
    Just which engineering solutions to which problems of internal
communication and information-manipulation has the human brain hit
upon, and what are their strengths and weaknesses?o These are the

     6. Kosslvn (1980) not only provides a detailed defense of
                                                                      his particular set of
answers to these questrnns (at that time), but also provides an excellent survey
                                                                                 of others

=== p. 295 ===

empirical questions addressed by the research on imagery in cognitive
psychology, and we should be cautious about advancing a priori answers to them! We might, I suppose, have found Mark I image-manipulation systems in our brains, complete with glowing phosphor
dots and an inner light-sensitive eye. (So far as I can see, it is not
impossible that the creatures on some planet might be endowed with
such contraptions.) And it takes experiments such as Reisberg and
Chambers' to show that the shortcuts hit upon by our brains pretty well
preclude discovering a Mark II system, with a bit-map format that never
takes advantage of shortcuts. (If we had such a system, solving the red
X puzzle in our heads would be easy, and so would rotating Texas.)
        Phenomenology provides clues, pointing in both directions: The
"sketchiness" of mental images, which is "intuitively obvious" in most
subjects' phenomenology, points to the brain's use of shortcuts, occasions on which the brain                               This is as true of visual
perception as oi visualizing. We already noted         in chapter 3 how hard
 it is to draw a rose that is  right  in front  of your eyes,  or even to copy
 a drawing, and the reason is that the      purely  spatial properties  that one
 must identify or discriminate in     order  to draw  well  have normally   been
 left behind in the course    of perceptual     processing,  summarized    in reports, not rendered for   further   perusal.   On the other  hand,  the  usefulness of mental images in helping us "see the pattern" or in "reminding
  us" of details we might otherwise forget, points to the exploitation of
 visual pattern-recognition machinery that could only occur if one part
  of the brain went to all the trouble of preparing special-format versions
  of the information for the benefit of those visual systems. As we already
  saw in chapter 1, the information-handling demands of such representation are formidable, and it should not surprise us that we are
  so poor at keeping even highly schematic diagrams stable in our
 heads.
      Here is a simple test to remind you how limited our abilities
 actually are: In your mind's eye, fill in the following three-by-three
 crossword puzzle, writing the following three words down in the columns, starting with the left column: GAS OIL DRY

 experimental and theoretical work on imagery. A good review of the work in the subsequent decade can be found in Farah (1988), and in Finke, Pinker, and Farah (1989).
        7. As Marvin Minsky puts It, "There is nothing peculiar about the
                                                                            idea of sensing
 events inside the brain. Agents are agents — and it is as easy for an agent to be wired to
 detect a bruin-caused brain-event, as to detect a world-caused brain-event" (1985, p.
 151).

=== p. 296 ===

       296   THE PHILOSOPHICAL. PROBLEMS OF CONSCIOUSNESS

        Can you readily read off the horizontal words? In an actual diagram on paper, these words would °pop out" at you — you would be
 unable not to see them. That, after all, is the point of making diagrams:
 to present the data in a format that makes a new breakdown or parsing
 of the data easy or inevitable. A three-by-three array of alphabetic characters is not a very complicated data structure, but it is apparently not
 something our brains can hold in place steadily enough for its visual
 systems to do their "pop out" work. (If you want to try again, here are
 two more groups of words for the columns: OPT NEW EGO, and FOE
 INN TED.)
       There is plenty of scope for individual variation in the tactics
 employed by different visualizers, however, and some may be able to
 find — or develop — imaging strategies that permit them to °read off"
 these diagrams. Calculating prodigies can teach themselves how to multiply ten-digit numbers together in their heads, and so it would not be
surprising if some people can develop prodigious talents for "crossword
reading" in their mind's eyes. These informal demonstrations give us
hints, but experiments can define much more incisively the sorts of
mechanisms and processes that people must be using in these acts of
self-manipulation. The evidence to date supports the view that we use
a mixed strategy, getting some of the benefits of visual analysis of arrays,
but also incorporating shortcut labels, teLling without showing.
      Notice, however, that even in the Mark II CADBLIND system,
which is ultrapictorial, incorporating a bit-map that renders color, shading, and texture pixel by pixel, there is still a sense — and a metaphysically important sense, as we shall see in the next two chapters —
in which it is all "tell" and no "show." Consider the red X on our
Shepard figure (figure 4). in the Mark I this is rendered in real red —

=== p. 297 ===

the CRT emits light, which has to be transduced by something in the
TV camera analogous to the cones in your eyes that respond to frequency differences. When the Vorsetzer rotates the image back and
forth, hunting for a glimpse of red through the hole, it is waiting
for its red-detector demons to shout. In the Mark H, that hardware is
thrown away, and the bit-map represents the color of each pixel by
a number. Perhaps the shade of red is color number 37. The Vorsetzer
in the Mark H, when it rotates the bit-map image back and forth, is
peering through the hole for a glimpse of 37. Or in other words, it
is asking whether any of the pixel-demons wants to tell it, "Color
number 37 here." All the red is gone there are only numbers in
there. In the end, all the work in a CADBLIND system must be done
by arithmetic operations on bit strings, just as we saw at the lowest
level of Shakey in chapter 4. And no matter how quasi-pictorial or
imagistic the processes are that eventuate in the Vorsetzer's verbal answers to questions, they will not be generated in an inner place where
the lost properties (the properties merely "talked about" in the bit-map)
are somehow restored in order to be appreciated by a judge that composes the answers.
       People are not CADBLIND systems. The fact that a CADBLIND
system can manipulate and inspect its "mental images" without benefit
 of a Cartesian Theater doesn't by itself prove that there is no Cartesian
Theater in the human brain, but it does prove that we don't have to
 postulate a Cartesian Theater to explain the human talent for solving
 problems "in the mind's eye." There are indeed mental processes that
 are strongly analogous to observation, but, when we strip down Koss-lyn's CRT metaphor to its essentials, we remove the very features that
 would call for a Cartesian Theater. There need be no time and place
 where "it all comes together" for the benefit of a single, unified discriminator; the discriminations can be accomplished in a distributed,
 asynchronous, multilevel fashion.

      2. WORDS, PICTURES, AND THOUGHTS
      The truly "creative" aspect of language resides not in its
      "infinite generative capacity" but in cycles of production and
      comprehension mediated by a mind capable of reflecting upon
      the multiple meanings attachable to an utterance, meanings
      that need not have been present in the thought that gave
      rise to the utterance but which become available through

=== p. 298 ===

      self-comprehension (Or deep interpretation of another's
      utterance) and can 'ead to a new thought to be expressed and
      re-interpreted, and so on indefinitely.
      H. STEPHEN STRAIGHT (1976), p. 540.

       The British economist John Maynard Keynes was once asked
 whether he thought in words or pictures. "I think in thoughts," was
 his reply. He was right to resist the suggestion that the "things we think
 in" are either words or pictures, for as we have seen, "mental images"
 are not just like pictures in the head, and "verbal" thinking is not just
 like talking to yourself. But saying one thinks in thoughts is really no
 improvement. It just postpones the question, for a thought is just whatever happens when we think — a topic about which there is no settled
 agreement.
       Now that we have considered sketches of the sorts of background
 machinery that is causally responsible for the details of our hetero-phenomenological worlds, we can begin to account for the phenomenology of thinking, explaining not only the limits and conditions on
 "visual" and "verbal" phenomenology, but looking for yet other varieties that escape that dichotomy.
       One of my favorite exercises in fictional heterophenomenology is
Vladimir Nabokov's novel The Defense (1930), about Grandmaster Lu-thin, a genius of the chessboard, who suffers a nervous breakdown in
the middle of his climactic match. We see three stages in the development of his consciousness: his boyish mind (before his discovery of
chess at about age ten), his chess-saturated mind (up until his nervous
breakdown), and the sorry remains of the first two stages after his breakdown, when, imprisoned by his wife in a world without chess — without chess talk, chess playing, chess books — his mind reverts to a sort
of spoiled infantile paranoia, brightened by stolen moments of chess —
lightning sneak attacks on the chess diagrams and puzzles in the newspapers — but ultimately curdling into chess obsessions that culminate
in his "sui-mate." Luzhjn, we learn, has so saturated his mind with
chess that he sees his whole life in its terms. Here is his awkward
courtship of the woman who will become his wife:
    Luzhin began with a series of quiet moves, the meaning of which
    he himself only vaguely sensed, his own peculiar declaration of
    love. "GO on, tell me more," she repeated, despite having noticed
    how morosely and dully he had fallen silent.
          He sat leaning on his cane and thinking that with a Knight's
    move of this lime tree standing on a sunlit slope one could take

=== p. 299 ===

     that telegraph pole over there, and simultaneously he tried to
     remember what exactly he had just been talking about [p. 971.

     With one shoulder pressed against his chest she tried with a cautious finger to raise his eyelids a little higher and the slight pressure on his eyeball caused a strange black light to leap there, to
     leap like his black Knight which simply took the Pawn if Turati
     moved it out on the seventh move, as he had done at their last
     meeting. [p. 114]

Here is a glimpse of his state of mind after his breakdown:

     He found himself in a smoky establishment where noisy phantoms
     were sitting. An attack was developing in every corner — and
     pushing aside tables, a bucket with a gold-necked glass Pawn
     sticking out of it and a drum that was being beaten by an arched,
     thick-maned chess Knight, he made his way to a gently revolving
     door.. .. [p. 139]
These themes are "images" in many regards, for chess is a spatial game,
and even the identity of the pieces is standardly fixed by their shapes,
but the power of chess over Luzhin's mind is not exhausted by the
visual or spatial properties of chess — everything that might be captured in photographs or films of a chessboard, its pieces in motion.
Indeed, these visual properties provide only the most superficial flavor
to his imagination. Much more powerful is the discipline provided by
the rules and tactics of the game; it is the abstract structure of chess
that he has become so obsessively familiar with, and it is his habits of
exploration of this structure that drive his mind from "thought" to
"thought."

     [He] presently would note with despair that he had been unwary
     again and that a delicate move had just been made in his life,
     mercilessly continuing the fatal combination. Then he would decide to redouble his watchfulness and keep track of every second
     of his life, for traps could be everywhere. And he was oppressed
     most of all by the impossibility of inventing a rational defense,
     for his opponent's aim was still hidden [p. 227].

     When you first learned to ride a bicycle or drive a car, you encountered a new structure of opportunities for action, with constraints,
signposts, ruts, vistas, a sort of abstract behavioral maze in which you

=== p. 300 ===

 quickly learned your way around. It soon became "second nature." You
 quickly incorporated the structure of that external phenomenon into
 your own control structure. In the process, you may have had periods
 of obsessive exploration, when you couldn't get your mind off the new
 moves. I remember a brief period of bridge mania during my adolescence during which I had obsessive and nonsensical bridge dreams. I
 would take the same finesse a hundred times, or dream of "bidding"
 during conversations with my teachers and classmates. My hypnogogic
reveries (those rather hallucinatory periods people occasionally have
as they are falling asleep or just beginning to wake up) were filled with
problems along the lines of "what is the correct response to a preemptive bid of three books — four knives or four forks?"
      It is quite common when encountering a new abstract structure
in the world — musical notation, a computer programming language,
common law, major league baseball — to find yourself trudging back
and forth over its paths, making mind-ruts for yourself — really digging
in and making yourself at home. Luzhin is only the extreme case; he
has only one structure with which to play, and he uses it for everything.
And eventually its structure dominates all other habit structures in his
mind, channeling the sequence of his thoughts almost as rigidly as the
sequence of instructions in a von Neumann machine program.
      Think of all the structures you have learned, in school and elsewhere: telling time, arithmetic, money, the bus routes, using the telephone. But of all the structures we become acquainted with in the
course of our lives, certainly the most pervasive and powerful source
of discipline of our minds is our native tongue. (One often sees best by
looking at contrasts; Oliver Sacks, in Seeing Voices, 1989, vividly draws
attention to the riches language brings to a mind by recounting the
terrible impoverishment of a deaf child's mind, if that child is denied
early access to a natural language — Sign, or sign language.) In chapter
8 we saw how the very vocabulary at our disposal influences not only
the way we talk to others, but the way we talk to ourselves. Over and
above that lexical contribution is the grammatical contribution. As
Levelt points out (1989, sec. 3.6), the obligatory structures of sentences
in our languages are like so many guides at our elbows, reminding
us to check on this, to attend to that, requiring us to organize facts
in certain ways. Some of this structure may indeed be innate, as
Chomsky and others have argued, but it really doesn't matter where
the dividing line is drawn between structures that are genetically deposited in the brain and those that enter as memes. These structures,

=== p. 301 ===

real or virtual, lay down some of the tracks on which "thoughts" can
then travel.
      Language infects and inflects our thought at every level. The words
in our vocabularies are catalysts that can precipitate fixations of content
as one part of the brain tries to communicate with another. The structures of grammar enforce a discipline on our habits of thought, shaping
the ways in which we probe our own "data bases," trying, like Plato's
bird-fancier, to get the right birds to come when we call. The structures
of the stories we learn provide guidance at a different level, prompting
us to ask ourselves the questions that are most likely to be relevant to
our current circumstances.
      None of this makes any sense so long as we persist in thinking of
the mind as ideally rational, and perfectly self-transparent or unified.
What good could talking to yourself do, if you already know what you
intended to say? But once we see the possibility of partial understanding, imperfect rationality, problematic intercommunication of parts, we
can see how the powerful forces that a language unleashes in a brain
can be exploited in various forms of bootstrapping, some of them beneficial, and some of them malignant.
      Here is an example.
     You are magnificent!
Here is another:
     You are pathetic!
You know what these sentences mean. You also know that I have just
introduced them out of the blue, as an aid to making a philosophical
point, and that they are not the intended speech acts of anyone. Certainly I am neither flattering you nor insulting you, and there is no one
else around. But could you flatter yourself, or insult yourself, by helping
yourself to one or the other of my sentences, and saying it to yourself,
over and over, "with emphasis"? Try it, if you dare. Something happens.
You don't believe yourself for one minute (you say to yourself), but
you find that saying the words to yourself does kindle reactions, maybe
even a little reddening of the ears, along with responses, retorts, disclaimers, images, recollections, projects. These reactions may go either
way, of course. Dale Carnegie was right about the power of positive
thinking, but like most technologies, thinking is easier to create than
to control. When you talk to yourself, you don't have to believe yourself
in order for reactions to set in. There are bound to be some reactions,

=== p. 302 ===

      302   THE PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS OF CONSCtOUSNESS

and they are bound to be relevant one way or the other to the meaning
of the words with which you are stimulating yourself. Once the reactions start happening, they may lead your mind to places where you
find yourself believing yourself after all — so be careful what you say
to yourself.
     The philosopher Justin Leiber sums up the role of language in
shaping our mental lives:

     Looking at ourselves from the computer viewpoint, we cannot
     avoid seeing that natural language is our most important "programming language." This means that a vast portion of our knowledge and activity is, for us, best communicated and understood
     in our natural language. . One could say that natural language
                                 .

     was our first great original artifact and, since, as we increasingly
     realize, languages are machines, so natural language, with our
     brains to run it, was our primal invention of the universal computer. One could say this except for the sneaking suspicion that
     language isn't something we invented but something we became.
     not something we constructed but something in which we created,
     and recreated, ourselves. [Leiber, 1991, p. 8J

       The hypothesis that language plays this all-important role in
thinking might seem at first glance to be a version of the much-discussed
hypothesis that there is a language of thought, a single medium in
which all cognition proceeds (Fodor, 1975). There is an important difference, however. Leiber aptly calls natural language a programming
language for the brain, but we may distinguish high-level programming
languages (such as Lisp and Prolog and Pascal) from the basic "machine
language" or slightly less basic "assembly language" out of which these
high-level languages are composed. High-level languages are virtual
machines, and they create (temporary) structures in a computer that
endow it with a particular pattern of strengths and weaknesses. The
price one pays for making certain things "easy to say" is making other
things "hard to say" or even impossible. Such a virtual machine may
structure only part of the computer's competence, leaving other parts
of the underlying machinery untouched. Bearing this distinction in
mind, it is plausible to maintain that the details of a natural language —
the vocabulary and grammar of English or Chinese or Spanish — constrain a brain in the manner of a high-level programming language. But
this is a far cry from asserting the dubious hypothesis that such a natural
language provides the structure all the way down. Indeed, Fodor and

=== p. 303 ===

others who defend the idea of the language of thought typically insist
that they are not talking about the level at which human languages do
their constraining work. They are talking about a deeper, less-accessible
level of representation. Fodor once made the point with the aid of an
amusing confession: he acknowledged that when he was thinking his
hardest, the only sort of linguistic items he was conscious of were
snatches along the lines of "C'mon, Jerry, you can do it!" Those may
have been his "thoughts," and we have just seen how they may in fact
play an important role in helping him solve the problems that confronted him, but they are hardly the stuff out of which to fashion perceptual inferences, hypotheses to be tested, and the other postulated
transactions of the ground-level language of thought. Keynes was right
to resist the words-versus-pictures choice; the media used by the brain
are only weakly analogous to the representational media of public life.

     3. REPORTING AND EXPRESSING

      Slowly but surely we've been chipping away at the idea of the
Cartesian Theater. We sketched an alternative to the Central Meaner in
chapter 8, and we've just seen how to resist the appeal of an inner CRT.
Mere glancing blows, I fear; the Cartesian Theater is still standing, still
exerting a tenacious pull on our imaginations. It's time to shift tactics
and attack from within, exploding the Cartesian Theater by showing
its incoherence in its own terms. Let's see what happens when we go
along with tradition, accepting the terms of everyday "folk psychology"
at face value. We can begin by reconsidering some of the plausible
claims Otto made at the beginning of chapter 8:

            When I speak, [Otto said] I mean what I say. My conscious
     life is private, but I can choose to divulge certain aspects of it to
     you. I can decide to tell you various things about my current or
     past experience. When I do this, I formulate sentences that I carefully tailor to the material I wish to report on. I can go back and
     forth between the experience and the candidate report, checking
     the words against the experience to make sure I have found ies
     mots justes. .. I attend to my particular conscious experience and
                     .

     anive at a judgment about which words would do the most justice
     to its character. When I am satisfied that I have framed an accurate
     report, I express it. From my introspective report, you can come
     to know about some feature of my conscious experience.

=== p. 304 ===

      Some of this message actually fits smoothly with our proposed
model of language-production in chapter 8. The process of back-andforth tailoring of the words to the content of the experience can be seen
in the pandemonium that mates up the word-demons to the content-demons. What is missing, of course, is the Inner I whose judgments
direct the matchmaking. But although Otto does go on about what "I
choose" and what "I judges" introspection doesn't really support this.
      We have scant access to the processes by which words "occur to
us" to say, even in the cases where we speak deliberately, rehearsing
our speech acts silently before uttering them. Candidates for something
to say just spring up from we know not where. Either we find ourselves
already saying them, or we find ourselves checking them out, sometimes
discarding them, other times editing them slightly and then saying
them, but even these occasional intermediate steps give us no further
hints about how we do them. We just find ourselves accepting or discarding this word and that. If we have reasons for our judgments, they
are seldom contemplated before the act, but only retrospectively obvious. ("I was going to use the word Jejune but stopped myself, since
it would have sounded so pretentious.") So we really have no privileged
insight into the processes that occur in us to get us from thought to
speech. They might be produced by a pandemonium, for all we know.
     But still, [Otto goes on] the Pandemonium model leaves out a level
     or a stage in the process. What your model lacks is not a projection
     into the "phenomenal space" of a Cartesian Theater — what a
     ridiculous idea! — but still an extra level of articulation in the
     psychology of the speaker. It's not enough for words to get strung
     together by some internal mating dance and then uttered. if they
     are to be reports of someone's conscious mental states, they have
     to be based somehow on an act of inner apprehension. What the
     Pandemonium model leaves out is the speaker's state of awareness
     that guides the speech.
      Whether or not Otto is right, he is certainly expressing the common
wisdom: this is just how we ordinarily conceive of our ability to tell
people about our conscious states. In a series of recent papers, the
philosopher David Rosenthal (1986, 1989. 1990a, b) has analyzed this
everyday concept of consciousness and its relation to our concepts of
reporting and expressing. He uncovers some structural features we can
put to good use. First, we can use his analysis to see, from the inside,
what the standard picture is and why           so compelling. Second, we
can show how it discredits the idea of zombies — with no help from

=== p. 305 ===

the outside. Third, we can turn the standard picture against itself, and
use the difficulties we encounter to motivate a better picture, one that
preserves what is right about the traditional view but discards the Carte-sian framework.

      What happens when we speak? At the heart of our everyday conception of this there is a truism: Provided we're not lying or insincere,
we say what we think. To put it more elaborately, we express one of
our beliefs or thoughts. Suppose, for instance, you see the cat anxiously
waiting by the refrigerator and you say, "The cat wants his supper."
This expresses your belief that the cat wants his supper. In expressing
your belief, you are reporting what you take to be a fact about the cat.
In this case you're reporting the cat's desire to be fed. It's important to
note that you're not reporting your belief, or expressing the cat's desire.
The cat is expressing his desire by standing anxiously by the refrigerator, and you, noticing this, use it as the basis — the evidence — for
your report. There are many ways of expressing a mental state (such

=== p. 306 ===

as a desire), but only one way of reporting one, and that is by uttering
a speech act (oral or written or otherwise signaled).
     One of the most interesting ways of expressing a mental state is
by reporting another mental state. In the example, you report the
 desire, thereby expressing your own belief about the cat's desire. Your
behavior is evidence not only that the cat has the desire but also that
you believe the cat has the desire. You might, however, have given us
evidence of your belief in some other way — perhaps by silently getting
up from your chair and preparing supper for the cat. This would have
expressed the same belief without reporting anything. Or you might
have just sat in your chair and rolled your eyes, unintentionally expressing your exasperation with the            desire just when you had
gotten comfortable in your chair. Expressing a mental state, deliberately
or not, is just doing something that provides good evidence for, or makes
manifest, that state to another observer — a mind reader, if you like.
Reporting a mental state, in contrast, is a more sophisticated activity,
always intentional, and involving language.
      Here, then, is an important clue about the source of the Cartesian
Theater model: Our everyday folk psychology treats reporting one's
own mental state on the model of reporting events in the external world.
Your report that the cat wants his supper is based on your observation
of the cat. Your report expresses your belief that the cat wants his
supper, a belief about the        desire. Let's call beliefs about beliefs,
desires about desires, beliefs about desires, hopes about fears, and so
forth second-order mental states. And if 1(1) believe that you (2) think
that I (3) want to have a cup of coffee, that belief of mine is a third-order belief. (For the importance of higher-order mental states in theories of mind, see my Intentional Stance, 1987a.) There can be no doubt
that there are salient, important differences marked by these everyday
distinctions when they are applied nonreflexively — when x believes
that y is in some mental state and x y. There is all the difference in
the world between the case where the cat wants to be fed and you know
it. and the case where the cat wants to be fed and you don't know it.
But what about the reflexive cases, where x = y? Folk psychology treats
these cases just the same.
      Suppose I report that I want to be fed. On the standard model I
must be expressing a second-order belief about my desire. When I report
my desire. I express a second-order belief — my belief about my desire.
What if I report that second-order belief, by saying "I believe I want to
be fed"? That report must express a third-order belief — my belief that
I do in fact believe that I want to be fed. And so on. Our everyday

=== p. 307 ===

concepts of what is involved in speaking sincerely generate in this way
a host of putatively distinct mental states: my desire is distinct from
my belief that I have the desire, which is distinct from my belief that
I have the belief that I have the desire, and so on.
      Folk psychology also goes into further distinctions. As Rosenthal
points out (along with many others), it distinguishes beliefs, which are
the underlying dispositional states, from thoughts, which are occurrent
or episodic states — transient events. Your belief that dogs are animals
has persisted continuously as a state of your mind for years, but my
drawing attention to it just now has spawned a thought in you — the
thought that dogs are animals, an episode that no doubt would not have
occurred in you just now without my provocation.
      It follows, of course, that there can be first-order thoughts and
second- and higher-order thoughts — thoughts about thoughts (about
thoughts .). Here, then, is the crucial step: When I express a belief —
          .   .

such as my belief that I want to be fed — I do not express the higher-order belief directly; what happens is that my underlying belief yields
an episodic thought, the higher-order thought that I want to be fed, and
I express that thought (if I choose to do so). All this is involved, Ro-senthal argues, in the common sense model of saying what you think.
      Since a hallmark of states of human consciousness is that they
can be reported (barring aphasia, paralysis, or being bound and gagged,
for instance), it follows, on Rosenthal's analysis, that "conscious states
must be accompanied by suitable higher-order thoughts, and noncon-scious mental states cannot be thus accompanied" (1990b, p. 16). The
higher-order thought in question must of course be about the state it
accompanies; it must be the thought that one is in the lower-order state
(or has just been in it — time marches on). This looks as if it is about
to generate an infinite regress of higher-order conscious states or
thoughts, but Rosenthal argues that folk psychology permits a striking
inversion: The second-order thought does not itself have to be conscious in order for its jIrst-order object to be conscious. You can express
a thought without being conscious of it, so you can express a second-order thought without being conscious of it — all you need be conscious
of is its object, the first-order thought you report.
      This may seem surprising at first, but on reflection we can recognize this as a familiar fact in a new perspective: You do not attend
to the thought you express, but to the object(s) that thought is about.
Rosenthal goes on to argue that although some second-order thoughts
are conscious — by virtue of third-order thoughts about them — these
are relatively rare. They are the explicitly introspective thoughts that

=== p. 308 ===

we would report (even to ourselves) only when in a state of hyper-sellconsciousness. ff1 say to you, "I am in pain," I report a conscious state.
my pain, and express a second-order belief — my belief that I am in
pain. If, waxing philosophical, I say "I think [or I am sure, or I believe]
that I am in pain," I thereby report a second-order thought, expressing
a third-order thought. Ordinarily, though, I would not have such a third-order thought and hence would not be conscious of such a second-order thought; I would express it, in saying "I am in pain," but would
not normally be conscious of it.
      This idea of unconscious higher-order thoughts may seem outrageous or paradoxical at first, but the category of episodes in question
is not really controversial, even though the term "thought" is not ordinarily used to refer to them. Rosenthal uses "thought" as a technical
term — roughly following Descartes's practice, in fact — to cover all
episodic contentful states, not just the episodes that we would ordinarily call thoughts. Thus a twinge of pain or a glimpse of stocking
would count as thoughts for Descartes and Rosenthal. Unlike Descartes,
however, Rosenthal insists on the existence of unconscious thoughts.
      Unconscious thoughts are, for instance, unconscious perceptual
events, or episodic activations of beliefs, that occur naturally — that
must occur — in the course of normal behavior control. Suppose you
tip over your coffee cup on your desk. In a flash, you jump up from
the chair, narrowly avoiding the coffee that drips over the edge. You
were not conscious of thinking that the desk top would not absorb the
coffee, or that coffee, a liquid obeying the law of gravity, would spill
over the edge, but such unconscious thoughts must have occurred —
for had the cup contained table salt, or the desk been covered with a
towel, you would not have leaped up. Of all your beliefs — about coffee,
about democracy, about baseball, about the price of tea in China —
these and a few others were immediately relevant to your circumstances, if we are to cite them in an explanation of why you leaped up,
they must have been momentarily accessed or activated or in some way
tapped for a contribution to your behavior, but of course this happened
unconsciously. These unconscious episodes would be examples of
what Rosenthal calls unconscious thoughts. (We have already encountered unconscious thoughts in some earlier examples: for instance, the
unconscious perceptions of vibration in the fingers that permit you to
identify, consciously, the textures of things touched with a wand, the
unconscious recollection of the woman with the eyeglasses, which led
to the mistaken experience of the woman rushing by.)
      Rosenthal points out that by finding a way of defining conscious-

=== p. 309 ===

ness in terms of unconscious mental states (the accompanying higher-order thoughts), he has uncovered a way of laying the foundations
within folk psychology for a noncircular, nonmysterious theory of consciousness (1990b). What distinguishes a conscious state from a non-conscious state, he argues, is not some inexplicable intrinsic property,
but the straightforward property of having a higher-order accompanying
thought that is about the state in question. (See Hamad, 1982, for a
similar strategy with some interesting variations.) This looks good for
folk psychology: it doesn't just wallow in mystery; it has the resources,
well mined by Rosenthal, to articulate an account of its prize category,
consciousness, in terms of its subsidiary and less-problematic categories. Part of the bargain, if we opt for his analysis, is that it can be
used to break down the putatively sharp distinction between conscious
beings and zombies.

     4. ZOMBIES, ZIMBOES, AND THE USER ILLUSION
     Mind is a pattern perceived by a mind. This is perhaps circular,
     but it is neither vicious nor paradoxical.
     DOUGLAS HOFSTADTER (1981), p. 200

      Philosophers' zombies, you will recall, seem to perform speech
acts, seem to report on their states of consciousness, seem to introspect.
But they are not really conscious at all, in spite of the fact that they
are, at their best, behaviorally indistinguishable from a conscious person. They may have internal states with functional content (the sort of
content that functionalists can assign to the inner machinery of robots),
but these are unconscious states. Shakey — as we imagined him — is
a paradigmatic zombie. When he "reports" an internal state, this is not
a conscious state that is being reported, since Shakey has no conscious
states, but an unconscious state that merely causes him to go into some
further unconscious state that directs the process of generating and
executing a so-called speech act composed of "canned' formulae.
(We've been letting Otto insist on this all along.)
      Shakey didn't first decide what to report, after observing something going on inside, and then figure out how to express it; Shakey
just found himself with things to say. Shakey didn't have any access
into why he wanted to say he was forming line drawings around the
light-dark boundaries of his mental images — he was just built that

=== p. 310 ===

 way. The central claim of chapter 8, however, was that, contrary to first
 appearances, the same is also true of you. You don't have any special
 access into why you want to say what you find you want to say; you
 are just built that way. But, unlike Shakey, you are constantly rebuilding
 yourself, discovering new things you want to say as a result of reflecting
 on what you have just found yourself wanting to say, and so forth.
       But couldn't a fancier Shakey do that as well? Shakey was a particularly crude zombie, but we can now imagine a more realistic and
 complex zombie, which monitors its own activities, including even its
 own internal activities, in an indefinite upward spiral of reflexivity. I
 will call such a reflective entity a zimbo. A zimbo is a zombie that, as
 a result of self-monitoring, has internal (but unconscious) higher-order
 informational states that are about its other, lower-order informational
 states. (It makes no difference for this thought experiment whether a
 zimbo is considered to be a robot or a human — or Martian — entity.)
 Those who believe that the concept of a zombie is coherent must surely
 accept the possibility of a zimbo. A zimbo is just a zombie that is
 behaviorally complex, thanks to a control system that permits recursive
 self-representation.
       Consider how a zimbo might perform in the Turing test, Alan
 Turing's famous proposal (1950) of an operational test for thinking in
a computer. A computer can think, Turing proclaimed, if it can regularly
heat a human opponent in the "imitation game": The two contestants
are hidden from a human judge but able to communicate with the judge
by typing messages back and forth via computer terminals. The human
contestant simply tries to convince the judge that he or she is human,
while the computer contestant does likewise — tries to convince the
judge that it is human. If the judge cannot regularly spot the computer,
the computer is deemed a thinker. Turing proposed his test as a
conversation-stopper; it was obvious to him that this test was so ridiculously difficult to pass that any computer that could win should be
seen by everyone to be an amazingly good thinker. He thought he had
set the bar high enough to satisfy any skeptic. He misestimated. Many
have argued that "passing the Turing test" would not be a sufficient
proof of intelligence, and certainly not of consciousness. (See Hofstad-ter, 1981b, Dennett, 1985a, and French, 1991, for analyses of the
strengths and weaknesses of the Turing test and its critics.)
      Now, a zimbo's chances in the Turing test should be as good as
any conscious person's, since the contestants show the judge nothing
but their behavior, and only their verbal (typing) behavior at that. Suppose, then, that you are the judge in a Turing test, and a zimbo's (ap-

=== p. 311 ===

parent) speech acts have convinced you that it is conscious. These
apparent speech acts shouldn't have convinced you — ex hypothesi,
for it is just a zimbo, and zimboes aren't conscious. Should it have
convinced itself, though? When a zimbo issues a report, expressing its
own second-order unconscious state, there is nothing to prevent it from
reflecting (unconsciously) on this very state of affairs. In fact, if it's
going to be convincing, it's going to have to be able to respond appropriately to (or take cognizance of) its own "assertions" to you.
       Suppose, for instance, that the zimbo is a fancier Shakey, and you,
as judge, have just asked it to solve a problem in its mind's eye and
then explain how it did it. It reflects on its own assertion to you that
it has just solved the problem by forming a line drawing on a mental
image. It would "know" that that was what it had wanted to say, and
if it reflected further, it could come to "know" that it didn't know why
that was what it wanted to say. The more you asked it about what it
knew and didn't know about what it was doing, the more reflective it
would become. Now what we have just succeeded in imagining, it
seems, is an unconscious being that nevertheless has the capability for
higher-order thoughts. But according to Rosenthal, when a mental state
is accompanied by a conscious or unconscious higher-order thought to
the effect that one has it, this ipso facto guarantees that the mental state
is a conscious state! Does our thought experiment discredit Rosenthal's
analysis, or discredit the definition of a zimbo?
       We can readily see that at the very least the zimbo would (unconsciously) believe that it was in various mental states — precisely
the mental states it is in position to report about should we ask it
questions. It would think it was conscious, even if it wasn't! Any entity
that could pass the Turing test would operate under the (mis?)apprehension that it was conscious. In other words, it would be a victim
of an illusion (cf. 1-larnad, 1982). What kind of an illusion? A User
illusion, of course. It would be the "victim" of the benign user illusion
of its own virtual machine!
       Isn't this a trick with mirrors, some illegitimate sort of philosopher's sleight of hand? I-low could there be a User illusion without a
Cartesian Theater in which the illusion is perpetrated? I seem to be in
imminent danger of being done in by my own metaphors. The problem
is that a virtual machine's user illusion is accomplished by a presentation of material in a theater of sorts, and there is an independent,
external audience, the User, for whose benefit the show is put on. I am
using a computer at this very moment, typing these words into a "file"
with the unobtrusive assistance of a word-processing program. When

=== p. 312 ===

I interact with the computer, I have limited access to the events occurring within it. Thanks to the schemes of presentation devised by
 the progranuners, I am treated to an elaborate audiovisual metaphor,
 an interactive drama acted out on the stage of keyboard, mouse, and
 screen. I, the User, am subjected to a series of benign illusions: I seem
 to be able to move the cursor (a powerful and visible servant) to the
 very place in the computer where I keep my file, and once that I see
 that the cursor has arrived "there," by pressing a key I get it to retrieve
 the file, spreading it out on a long scroll that unrolls in front of a window
 (the screen) at my command. I can make all sorts of things happen
 inside the computer by typing in various commands, pressing various
 buttons, and I don't have to know the details; I maintain control by
 relying on my understanding of the detailed audiovisual metaphors
 provided by the User illusion.
       For most computer-users, it is only in terms of these metaphors
 that they have any appreciation of what is happening inside. This is
 one of the facts that makes a virtual machine such a tempting analogy
 for consciousness, for it has always seemed that our access to what is
 happening inside our own brains is limited; we don't have to know
 how the backstage machinery of our brains does its magic; we are acquainted with its operations only as they come clothed for us in the
 interactive metaphors of phenomenology. But if, when we avail ourselves of this tempting analogy, we maintain the "obvious" separation
between Presentation on the one hand and User Appreciation of the
show on the other, we seem to end up right back in the Cartesian
Theater. How could there be a User illusion without this separation?
       There couldn't be; the user that provides the perspective from
which the virtual machine becomes "visible" has to be some sort of
external observer — a Vorsetzer. And one might at first think that the
concept of such an observer had to be the concept of a conscious observer, but we have already seen that this is not so. The Vorsetzer that
sat in front of the CAD system in the original Mark I CADBLIND system
was not conscious, but was nevertheless exactly as limited in its access
to the inner workings of the CAD system as any conscious user would
be. And once we discard the gratuitous screen-and-camera, the Presentation and User Appreciation evaporate, replaced, as so often before in
our account, by a host of more modest transactions. The "external
observer" can be gradually incorporated into the system, leaving behind
a few fossil traces: bits of "interface" whose various formats continue
to constrain the sorts of questions that can be answered, and thus con-

=== p. 313 ===

strain the contents that can be expressed.8 There doesn't have to be a
single place where the Presentation happens.9 And as Rosenthal's analysis suggests to us, even our ordinary concept of consciousness, as anchored in the intuitions of common sense or folk psychology, can
tolerate the unconsciousness of the higher-order states whose presence
in the system accounts for the consciousness of some of its states.
      Is the process of unconscious reflection, then, a path by which a
zombie could turn itself into a           and thereby render itself conscious? If it is, then zombies must be conscious after all. All zombies
axe capable of uttering convincing "speech acts" (remember, they're
indistinguishable from our best friends), and this capability would be
magical if the control structures or processes causally responsible for
it in the zombie's brain (or computer or whatever) were not reflective
about the acts and their (apparent, or functional) contents. A zombie
might begin its career in an uncommunicative and unreflective state,
and hence truly be a zombie, an unconscious being, but as soon as it
began to "communicate" with others and with itself, it would become
equipped with the very sorts of states, according to Rosenthal's analysis,
that suffice for consciousness.
      if, on the other hand, Rosenthal's analysis of consciousness in
 terms of higher-order thoughts is rejected, then zombies can live on for
 another day's thought experiments. I offer this parable of the zimboes
 tongue in cheek, since I don't think either the concept of a zombie or
 the folk-psychological categories of higher-order thoughts can survive

        8. In chapter 7 (p. 223). I asked, "teased to the surface of what?" and promised to
answer the question later. This is my answer. The (metaphorical) surface is determined
by the fonnat of Interactions between the parts.
        9. It is interesting to compare different traces of this idea of the User-in-the-brain
in the work of widely disparate thinkers. Here is Minsky (1985): "To overstate the case
a bit, what we call 'consciousness' consists of little more than menu lists that flash, from
time to time, on mental screen displays that other systems use (p. 571... Divide the
                                                                                 .

brain into two parts. A and B. Connect the A-brain's inputs and outputs to the real
world — so it can sense what happens there. But don't connect the B-brain to the outer
world at all; instead, connect it so that the A-brain is the B-brain's world" Ip.     Minsky
wisely refrains from venturing any anatomical dividing lines, but others are prepared to
venture a few. When Kosslyn first speculated about consciousness as a virtual machine,
he was Inclined to locate the User In the frontal lobes (see also Kosslyn. 1980. p. 21),
and more recently Edelman has followed his own argument path to the same conclusion.
put in terms of the "value-dominated self/nonself memory" that he locates in the frontal
lobes and assigns the task of interpreting the productions of the rest of the brain (Edelman.
 1989, p. 102ff).

=== p. 314 ===

      314   THE PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS OF CONSOOUSNESS

except as relics of a creed outworn. Rosenthal has done us an excellent
service in exposing the logic of these everyday concepts, however, and
thanks to the clear view we now have of them, we can see what a better
replacement would be.

      5. PROBLEMS WITH FOLK PSYCHOLOGY

      Rosenthal finds folk psychology positing an ever-expandable hierarchy of higher-order thoughts, conceived to be salient, independent,
contentful episodes occurring in real time in the mind. How does this
vision stand up, when we look for confirmation? Are there such distinct
states and events in the brain? if we're generous about what counts,
the answer must be yes. There certainly are familiar psychological differences that can be — and typically are — described in these terms.
     It suddenly occurred to Dorothy that she wanted to leave — and
     had wanted to leave for quite some time.
 Here it seems Dorothy acquired the second-order belief — by having a
 second-order thought — about her desire some time after the desire had
 gone into effect. There are many everyday cases of this sort: "And then
 it occurred to him that he was looking right at the missing cuff link."
 "He loves her — he just doesn't realize it yet." It can hardly be denied
 that these ordinary sentences allude to genuine transitions from one
 "state of mind" to another. And intuitively, as Rosenthal points out,
 the transition is a matter of becoming conscious of the first-order state.
 When Freud, building on such everyday cases, postulates a vast hidden
realm of unconscious mental states, they are precisely states that their
 subjects do not believe they are in. These people are in states of mind
that it hasn't yet occurred to them — via higher-order thoughts — they
are in.
       This way of describing these differences is familiar, but whether
it is entirely perspicuous is another matter. These are all transitions
into a better-informed state (to speak as neutrally as possible), and being
better informed in this way is indeed a necessary condition for reporting
(as opposed to merely expressing) the earlier "state of mind." Now the
incautious way of saying this would be: In order to report a mental
state or event, you have to have a higher-order thought which you
express. This gives us the picture of first observing (with some inner
sense organ) the mental state or event, thereby producing a state of
belief, whose onset is marked by a thought, which is then expressed.
This causal chain, as we saw, mimics the causal chain for reporting

=== p. 315 ===

ordinary external events: You first observe the event with the help of
your sense organs, producing in you a belief, and then a thought, which
you express in your report.
       This hypothesized higher-order thought is, I think, the "extra level
of articulation" Otto thought he could discern in his own psychology;
it is the thought Otto's words express when he reports his own conscious experience. But according to the model of speech-generation we
sketched in chapter 8, Otto's model has the causation just backwards.
It is not that first one goes into a higher-order state of self-observation,
creating a higher-order thought, so that one can then report the lower-order thought by expressing the higher-order thought. It is rather that
the second-order state (the better-informed state) comes to be created
by the very process of framing the report. We don't first apprehend our
experience in the Cartesian Theater and then, on the basis of that acquired knowledge, have the ability to frame reports to express; our being
able to say what it is like is the basis for our "higher-order beliefs."ba
       At first a Pandemonium process of speech act design looks wrong
because it seems to leave out the central observer/decider whose
thought is eventually going to be expressed. But this is a strength, not
a weakness, of this model. The emergence of the expression is precisely
what creates or fixes the content of the higher-order thought expressed.
There need be no additional episodic "thought." The higher-order state
 literally depends on — causally depends on — the expression of the
speech act. But not necessarily on the public expression of an overt
speech act. In chapter 7, we saw how the organism's need for better
and better internal communication of information might have led to
the creation of habits of self-manipulation that could take the place of
 the evolutionarily more-laborious process of creating an inner eye, an

        10. This is at least close kin to a central theme in Wittgenstein's later work, but
Wittgenstein declined to develop any positive account or model of the relation between
what we say and what we are talking about when we (apparently) report our mental
states. The philosopher Elizabeth Anscombe, in her frustratingly obscure classic. Intention (1957). tried to fill this gap left by Wittgenstein. arguing that it was wrong to claim
that we know what our intentions are: rather we just can say what our intentions are.
She also attempted to characterize a category of things we can know without observation.
There is a flawed discussion of these claims In my Content and Consciousness (1969)
chapters 8 and 9. 1 have always thought there was something right, and important and
original, lurking in those passages. My second pass at them is to be found in 'Toward
a Cognitive Theory of Consciousness' (1978) reprinted In Brainstorms, especially sections IV and V (pp. 164—171 in Brainstorms). This section is my current attempt to bring
these ideas to light, and is a substantial departure from both earlier versions.

=== p. 316 ===

actual internal organ that could monitor the brain. The only way for a
human brain to get itself into something like a higher-order belief state,
we surmised, is to engage in the process rather like reporting first-order
states to itself.
      We must break the habit of positing ever-more-central observers.
As a transitional crutch, we can reconceive of the process as not
knowledge-by-observation but on the model of hearsay. I believe that
p because I have been told by a reliable source that p. By whom? By
myself — or at any rate, by one or more of my "agents." This is not an
entirely alien way of thinking; we do speak, after all, of the testimony
of our senses, a metaphor that suggests that our senses do not bring
exhibits into "court" to show us, but rather tell us of things. Leaning
on this metaphor (until we can get used to the complexities of a better
alternative), we might rely on a slogan:
     If I couldn't talk to myself, I'd have no way of knowing what I
     was thinking.

      This is not yet quite the right way to think of it, in several regards. First, there is the difference — which I have been glossing over —
between one entity "talking to itself" and a variety of subsystems
"talking to each other." A proper transition between these two ideas
will be negotiated in chapter 13, on the self. Second, as we've seen,
the emphasis on linguistic expression is an overstatement; there are
other strategies of self-manipulation and self-expression that are not
verbal.
      It may well appear that I am proposing a poor bargain; giving up
the relative crispness and clarity of the standard folk-psychological
model, with its hierarchy of inner observations, for a sketchy alternative
we can still scarcely conceive. But the clarity of the traditional model
is an illusion, for reasons hinted at in chapter 5, when we explored the
strange topic of real seeming. Now we can diagnose the problems more
precisely. Otto is a spokesperson for folk psychology, and if we let him
continue, he will soon tie himself in knots. Otto's view, which doggedly
extends the folk-psychological categories "all the way in," generates
an explosion of distinct "representational states," the relations between
which generate artifactual conundrums. Otto continues:
     My public report of a conscious state, should I choose to make
     one, might contain a mistake. I might make a slip of the tongue,
     or be mistaken about what a word means and thus misinform you
     inadvertently. Any such error of expression I didn't catch would

=== p. 317 ===

     be liable to create a false belief in you about the facts — about the
     way it really is with me. And the mere fact that I didn't happen
     to catch an error wouldn't mean that there wasn't an error. On the
     one hand, there is the truth about how it is with me, and then on
     the other hand, there is what I eventually say about how it is with
     me (if I choose to do so). Although I tend to be a highly reliable
     reporter, there is always room for errors to creep in.

      This is one of those situations where two hands aren't enough.
For, as Rosenthal has shown us, in addition to "how it is with me"
and "what I eventually say" it seems there must be an intervening third
fact: my belief about how it is with me." For when I sincerely say what
I say, meaning what I mean, I express one of my beliefs — my belief
about how it is with me. Indeed, there is an intervening fourth fact: my
episodic thought that this is how it is with me.
      Might my belief about how it is with me be mistaken? Or might
I only think that this is how it is with me? Or in other words, might it
only seem to me that this was my current experience? Otto wanted one
separation, but now we are threatened with more: between the subjective experience and the belief about it, between that belief and the
episodic thought it spawns on the way to verbal expression, and between that thought and its ultimate expression. And, like the multiplying brooms of the sorcerer's apprentice, there are more separations
in the offing once we accept these. Suppose I have my subjective experience (that's one thing) and it provides the grounds in me for my
belief that I'm having it (that's a second thing) which in turn spawns
the associated thought (a third thing) which next incites in me a communicative intention to express it (a fourth thing), which yields, finally,
an actual expression (a fifth thing). Isn't there room for error to creep
into the transition between each thing? Might it not be the case that I
believe one proposition but, due to a faulty transition between states,
come to think a different proposition? (If you can "misspeak," can't
you also "misthink"?) Wouldn't it be possible to frame the intention
to express a rather different proposition from the one you are thinking?
And mightn't a defective memory in the communicative intention subsystem lead you to set out with one preverbal message to be expressed
and end up with a different preverbal message serving as the standard
against which errors were to be corrected? Between any two distinct

     11. In   Brainstorms, I exploited this feature of folk psychology in my discussion
of               of phenomenological beliefs'S (l978a. p. 177ff).

=== p. 318 ===

 things there is logical room for error, and as we multiply individual
 states with definite contents, we discover — or create — multiple
 sources of error.
       There is a strong temptation to cut through this tangle by declaring
 that my thought (or belief) about how it seems to me is just the same
 thing as what my experience actually is. There is a temptation to insist,
 in other words, that there is logically no room for error to creep in
 between them, since they are one and the same thing. Such a claim has
 some nice properties. It stops the threatened explosion at step one —
 usually the right place to stop an explosion or regress — and it has
 some genuine intuitive appeal, brought out nicely in a rhetorical question: What possible sense could be attached to the claim that something
 only seemed to me to seem to me (to seem to me. .) to be a horse?
                                                        .

        But here we must tread carefully, tiptoeing around the bones of
 defunct philosophical theories (including some of my own — cf. Den-nett, 1969, 1978c, 1979a). It might seem that we can stick with the good
 old-fashioned folk-psychological categories of beliefs, thoughts, beliefs
 about beliefs, thoughts about experiences, and the like, and avoid the
 perplexities of self-knowledge by just merging the higher- and lower-order reflexive cases: by declaring that when I believe that I believe
 that p. for instance, it follows logically that I believe that p, and in the
 same spirit, when I think I'm in pain, it follows logically that I am in
 pain, and so forth.
        If this were so, when I expressed a second-order belief by reporting
 a first-order belief, for instance, I would really just be dealing with one
 state, one thing, and the fact that in reporting one thing I was expressing
 "another" would be due to a mere verbal distinction, like the fact that
Jones set out to marry his fiancée and ended up marrying his wife.
        But this merger will not quite do the work that needs to be done.
To see this, consider once again the role of memory, as conceived of
in folk psychology. Even if it is intuitively plausible that you cannot
be mistaken about how it is with you right now, it is not at all intuitively
plausible that you cannot be mistaken about how it was with you back
then. If the experience you are reporting is a past experience, your
memory — on which you rely in your report — might be contaminated
by error. Perhaps your experience was actually one way, but you now
misremember it as having been another way. It certainly could seem
to you now to have seemed to you then to have been a horse — even
if in fact it seemed to you then to have been a cow. The logical possibility of misremembering is opened up no matter how short the time
interval between actual experience and subsequent recall — this is

=== p. 319 ===

                                                 SI-4OWANDTELL     319

what gave Orwellian theories their license. But as we saw in chapter
5, the error that creeps into subsequent belief thanks to Orwellian
memory-tampering is indistinguishable — both from the outside and
the inside — from the error that creeps into original experience thanks
to Stalinesque illusion-construction. So even if we could maintain that
you have "direct" and "immediate" access to your current judgment
(your second-order thought about how things seem to you now), you
will not thereby be able to rule out the possibility that it is a misjudgment about how it seemed to you a moment ago.
      If we individuate states (beliefs, states of consciousness, states of
communicative intention, etc.) by their content — which is the standard means of individuation in folk psychology — we end up having
to postulate differences that are systematically undiscoverable by any
means, from the inside or the outside, and in the process, we lose the
subjective intimacy or incorrigibility that is supposedly the hallmark
of consciousness. We already saw instances of that in the discussion
in chapter 5 of Orwellian versus Stalinesque models of temporal phenomena. And the solution is not to cling to one or the other doctrine
made available by folk psychology, but to abandon this feature of folk
psychology.
      We replace the division into discrete contentful states — beliefs,
meta-beliefs, and so forth — with a process that serves, over time, to
ensure a good fit between an entity's internal information-bearing
events and the entity's capacity to express (some of) the information
 in those events in speech. That is what the higher-order states were
 supposed (by Otto) to ensure, but they failed to carve nature at its joints.
 Indeed, they posited joints that were systematically indiscernible in
nature.
      These artifacts of folk psychology live on, however, as denizens
in the heterophenomenological worlds of the subjects whose world
views are indeed shaped by that conceptual scheme. To put the point
tautologically, since it really does seem to people that they have both
these beliefs about their experiences, and (in addition) the experiences
themselves, these experiences and beliefs-about-experiences are both
part of how it seems to them. And so we have to explain that fact —
not the fact that our minds are organized into hierarchies of higher-ordered representational "states" of belief, meta-belief, and so forth,
but that our minds tend to seem to us to be so ordered.
      I have ventured two reasons why we tend to find this such an
attractive idea. First, we persist in the habit of positing a separate process of observation (now of inner observation) intervening between the

=== p. 320 ===

circumstances about which we can report and the report we issue —
overlooking the fact that at some point this regress of interior observers
must be stopped by a process that unites contents with their verbal
expression without any intermediary content-appreciator. And second,
internal communications created in this way do in fact have the effect
of organizing our minds into indefinitely powerful reflective or self-monitoring systems. Such powers of reflection have often been claimed
to be at the heart of consciousness, with good reason. We may use the
oversimplified model of folk psychology as a sort of crutch for the
imagination when we try to understand self-monitoring systems, but
when we use it, we risk lapsing into Cartesian materialism. We should
start learning how to get along without it, and in the next chapter, we
will take a few more cautious steps.

