=== chunk: dennett-1991-consciousness-explained/ch11-dismantling-witness-protection ===
title: Dismantling the Witness Protection Program
source_pdf: docs/sources/dennett-1991-consciousness-explained/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 336-383
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 321
plan_page_end: 368
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 321 ===

                                         DISMANTLING THE
                                   WITNESS PROTECTION
                                             PROGRAM

     1. REVIEW

       In Part I, we surveyed the problems and laid down some methodological presuppositions and principles. In Part H, we sketched a
new model of consciousness, the Multiple Drafts model, and began the
task of showing why it should be preferred to the traditional model,
the Cartesian Theater. While the idea of the Cartesian Theater, once
made explicit, exhibits its flaws quite dramatically — there are no
avowed Cartesian materialists — the background assumptions and habits of thought it has fostered continue to motivate objections and distort
"intuition." Now in Part m, we are investigating the implications of
our alternative model, by answering a succession of compelling objections. Some of these objections betray a persisting — if disavowed —
allegiance to the dear old Cartesian Theater.
       "But where does the understanding happen?" This question has
been hiding at the center of controversy since the seventeenth century.
Descartes confronted a wall of skepticism when he insisted (correctly)
that mechanisms in the brain could account for at least a great deal of
understanding. For instance, Antoine Arnauld, in his objections to the
Meditations, noted that "at first sight it seems incredible that it can
come about, without the assistance of any soul, that the light reflected
from the body of a wolf onto the eyes of a sheep should move the
minute fibers of the optic nerves, and that on reaching the brain this
 motion should spread the animal spirits throughout the nerves in the

=== p. 322 ===

 manner necessary to precipitate the sheep's flight" (1641, p. 144). Des-canes replied that this is no more incredible than the human capacity
 to throw out one's arms protectively when falling, also a reaction accomplished mechanically, without benefit of "soul." This idea of "mechanical" interpretation in the brain is the central insight of any
 materialistic theory of the mind, but it challenges a deeply held intuition: our sense that for real understanding to occur, there has to be
 someone in there to validate the proceedings, to witness the events
 whose happening constitutes the understanding. (The philosopher John
 Searle exploits this intuition in his famous Chinese Room thought experiment, which will be considered in chapter 14.)
      Descartes was a mechanist par excellence when it came to every
other phenomenon in nature, but when it came to the human mind, he
flinched. In addition to mechanical interpretation, he claimed, the brain
also provides material to a central arena — what I've been calling the
Cartesian Theater — where, in human beings, the soul can be a Witness
and arrive at its own judgments. Witnesses need raw materials on which
to base their judgments. These raw materials, whether they are called
"sense data" or "sensations" or "raw feels" or "phenomenal properties
of experience," are props without which a Witness makes no sense.
These props, held in place by various illusions, surround the idea of
a central Witness with a nearly impenetrable barrier of intuitions. The
task of this chapter is to break through that barrier.

       2. BLINDSIGHT: PARTIAL ZOMBIEHOOD?

      Of all the terrible accidents that befall people, a tiny fraction are
partly redeemed by the fact that they reveal something of nature's mysteries to inquiring scientists. This is particularly true of brain damage
brought on by trauma (gunshots, traffic accidents, and the like), tumor,
or          The resulting patterns of disability and spared ability sometimes provide substantial — even startling — evidence about how the
mind is accomplished by the brain. One of the most surprising, as its
paradoxical name suggests, is blindsight. It seems at first to have been
made to order for philosophers' thought experiments: an affliction that

       1 Tim Shallice. in From Neuropsychology to Mental Structure (1988), provIdes
an up-to-date and closely argued discussion of the reasoning involved in analyzing these
experiments of nature.         recent books provide good popular accounts of some of
these fascinating cases: Howard Gardner, The Shattered Mind (1975), and Oliver Sacks.
The Man Who Mistook His Wife for His Hat

=== p. 323 ===

turns a normal, conscious person into a partial zombie, an unconscious
automaton with regard to some stimuli, but a normally conscious person with regard to the rest. So it is not surprising that philosophers
have elevated blindsight to a sort of mythic status as an example around
which to build arguments. As we shall see, however, blindsight does
not support the concept of a zombie; it undermines it.
      In normal human vision, the incoming signals from the eyes travel
via the optic nerves through various way stations to the occipital cortex
or visual cortex, the part of the brain at the very back of the skull above
the cerebellum. Information about the left visual field (the left halves
of the fields from each eye) is spread over the right visual cortex, and
the right visual field on the left cortex. Occasionally a vascular accident
(e.g., a burst blood vessel) will destroy a portion of the occipital cortex,
creating a blind spot or scotoma, a relatively large hole in the visually
experienced world, on the side opposite the damage.

                                   Figure ILl

 In the extreme case   where  both  left and right visual cortices have been
 destroyed, the person is rendered completely blind. More often, the
 whole visual cortex on one side of the brain is destroyed by vascular
 accident, leading to the loss of the opposite half of the visual field; loss
 of the left visual cortex would produce right hemianopia, complete
 blindness in the right hemifield.
       What is it like to have a scotoma? It might seem that this is already
 familiar to all of us, for we all have blind spots in our visual fields
 corresponding to the places on our retinas where there are no rods or
 cones because the optic nerve exits the eyeball there. A normal blind

=== p. 324 ===

 spot, or optic disk, is not small: it blanks out a circle with a diameter
 of about 6 degrees of visual angle. Close one eye and look at the cross,
 holding the page about ten inches from your eyes. One of the "blind
 spot" disks should disappear. Close the other eye, and the opposite
 disk should disappear. (It may take some adjustment of the distance
from the page to make the effect happen. Keep looking straight at the
cross.) Why don't you normally notice this gap in your visual field? In
part because you have two eyes, and one eye covers for the other; their
blind spots do not overlap. But even with one eye closed, you won't
notice your blind spot under most conditions. Why not? Since your
brain has never had to deal with input from this area of your retina, it
has devoted no resources to dealing with it. There are no homunculi
responsible for receiving reports from this area, so when no reports
arrive, there is no one to complain. An absence of information is not
the same as information about an absence. In order for you to see a
hole, something in your brain would have to respond to a contrast:
either between the inside and outside edge — and your brain has no
machinery for doing that at this location — or between before and after:
now you see the disk, now you don't. (That's how the disappearing
black disk in Figure 11.2 alerts you to your blind spot.)

 .                                    I

                                                                       .
      Like our normal blind spots, scotomata have definite locations
and some have sharp boundaries that can be readily plotted by an
experimenter, using a stimulus such as a point of light that can be
moved around in the subject's visual field. The subject is asked to report
when the spot of light is no longer experienced — a variation on the
experiment you just conducted on yourself to discover your blind spot.
Reports from the subject can then be correlated with maps of the damage
in the cortex, produced by CT (computer-aided tomography) and MRJ
(magnetic resonance imaging) scans of the brain. A scotoma is different
in one important regard from the normal blind           it is usually noticed
by the subject. This is not just because it is larger than the normal blind
spot. Since it is caused by the loss of cells in the visual cortex that
previously "reported to" other cells in the cortex that also "cared about"

=== p. 325 ===

               DISMANTLING THE %MTNESS PROTECTiON PROGRAM        325

information from certain regions of the retinas, their absence is noticed.
The brain's expectations are disrupted; something that should be there
is missing, some epistemic hunger goes unsatisfied. So the subject is
normally aware of the scotoma, but as a lack, not as a positive area of
black, such as you might notice if someone pasted a circle of black
paper on your car windshield.
       Since the normal visual pathways in the brain have been disrupted
or cut, one would expect that people with scotomata would be utterly
unable to glean any information from vision about things happening
in their blind fields. They're blind, after all. And that is just what they
say: They experience nothing visual whatever inside the boundaries of
their scotomata — no flashes, edges, colors, twinkles, or starbursts.
Nothing. That's what blindness is. But some people with scotomata
exhibit an astonishing talent: in spite of their utter lack of conscious
visual experience in the blind area, they can sometimes "guess" with
remarkable accuracy whether or not a light has just been flashed in the
field, and even whether a square or circle was shown. This is the phenomenon called blindsight (Weiskrantz, 1986, 1988, 1990). Just how
blindsight is to be explained is still controversial, but no researcher
 thinks there is anything "paranormal" going on. There are at least ten
 different pathways between the retina and the rest of the brain, so even
 if the occipital cortex is destroyed, there are still plenty of communication channels over which the information from the perfectly normal
 retinas could reach other brain areas. Many tests have now been performed on blindsight subjects, and there is no doubt that they can do
 much better than chance (even as good as 100 percent correct under
 some conditions) at guessing various simple shapes, the direction of
 motion, the presence or absence of light. No blindsighted person has
 yet exhibited a capacity to discriminate colors in the blind field,
 recent research by Stoerig and Cowey (1990) provides evidence that
 this may be possible.
        What is going on in blindsight? Is it, as some philosophers and
 psychologists have urged, visual perception without consciousness —
 of the sort that a mere automaton might exhibit? Does it provide a
 disproof (or at any rate a serious embarrassment) to functionalist theories of the mind by exhibiting a case where all the functions of vision
 are still present, but all the good juice of consciousness has drained
 out? It provides no such thing. In their rush to harness blindsight to
  pull their ideological wagons, philosophers have sometimes overlooked
  some rather elementary facts about the phenomena of blindsight and
  the experimental setting in which they can be elicited.

=== p. 326 ===

       Like the "temporal anomalies" analyzed in chapters 5 and 6, the
 phenomena of blindsight appear only when we treat subjects from the
 standpoint of heterophenomenology. The experiments couldn't be conducted if the experimenters couldn't give verbal instructions to the
 subjects (and be confident that they were understood), and the subjects'
 responses provide evidence of a startling phenomenon only when they
 are interpreted as speech acts. This is almost too obvious to notice, so
I must pause to rub it in.
      The interpretation of blindsight is controversial in many ways,
but remarkably uncontroversial in one regard: Everyone agrees that the
blindsight subject somehow comes to be informed about some event in
the world via the eyes (that's the "sight" part), in spite of having no
conscious visual experience of the relevant event (that's the "blind"
part). More compactly, blindsight involves (1) receipt of visual information that is (2) nevertheless unconscious. The proof of (1) is straightforward: the subject does much better than chance on tests that probe
for that information. The proof of (2) is more circumstantial: the subjects
deny that they are conscious of any such events, and their verbal denials
are supported by neurological evidence of brain damage on the one
hand, and by the coherence of their denials on the other. So we believe
them!2
      This is not a trivial point. Notice that what is striking about blind-sight would evaporate immediately if we concluded that blindsight
subjects were malingering — just pretending not to be conscious. Or,
closer to home, compare our acceptance of the denials of blindsight
subjects to the skepticism with which we greet the same denials when
they issue from people diagnosed as suffering from "hysterical blindness." Sometimes people whose eyes and brains are apparently in working order, so far as physiologists can determine, have nevertheless
complained that they have been struck blind; they support this complaint by acting "just like a blind person." One can often find a fairly
plausible reason why such a person should be motivated to "become"
blind — either as a punishment to themselves or to someone who must
now care and feel sorry for them, or as a way of denying some terrible
visual memory, or as a sort of panic response to some other illness or

       2. Note that the details of neurological damage by themselves (without the denials)
would prove nothing; it is only by matching up neurological damage with (credible)
reports and behavioral evidence that we get any hypotheses about which parts of the
brain are essential for which conscious phenomena.

=== p. 327 ===

                 DISMANTUNG THE WiTNESS PROTECTION PROGRAM                  327

debility — so this is "psychosomatic" blindness if it is blindness at all.
Are they really blind? They might be. After all, one might argue, if
psychosomatic pain is real pain, and psychosomatic nausea is real
enough to make one vomit, why shouldn't psychosomatic blindness be
real blindness?
       Hysterically blind people claim to be blind, but, like blindsight
subjects, they nevertheless give unmistakable evidence that they are
taking in visual information. For instance, hysterically blind people
typically do significantly worse than chance if asked to guess about the
visible features of things! This is a sure sign that they are somehow
using visual information to guide their behavior into a preponderance
of "errors." Hysterically blind people have an uncanny knack of finding
chairs to bump into. And yet, unlike outright malingerers, when hysterically blind people say they are having no visual experiences, they
are sincere — they really believe what they say. Shouldn't we? How
should we treat the texts of these two different groups of subjects when
we go to extrapolating their heterophenomenological worlds?
       Here is a place where the ultracautious policies of heterophenom-enology pays dividends. Both blindsight subjects and hysterically blind
 people are apparently sincere in their avowals that they are unaware
 of anything occurring in their blind field. So their heterophe-nomenological worlds are alike — at least in respect to the presumptive
 blind field. And yet there is a difference. We have less knowledge of
 the neuroanatomical underpinnings of hysterical blindness than we do
 of blindsight, yet we feel, intuitively, much more skeptical of their
 denials.3 What makes us suspect that the hysterically blind are not
 really blind at all, that they are even in some way or to some degree
 conscious of their visual worlds? The suspiciously auspicious circumstances of their blindness make us wonder, but beyond that circumstantial evidence there is a simpler reason: We doubt their blindness
 claims because without prompting, hysterically blind people sometimes use the information their eyes provide for them in ways blind sight
 subjects do not.
       A factor is present in the blindsight experimental situation that
 fits so perfectly with our standard assumptions that almost no one
 bothers to discuss it (but see Marcel, 1988; van Gulick, 1989; Carruthers,

       3. Without the confirmation of the brain scans showing the cortical damage, there
would surely also be widespread skepticism about the genuineness of the scotomata of
blindsight subjects. See, e.g., Campion Latto. and Smith (1983) and Weiskrantz (1988).

=== p. 328 ===

           328   THE PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS OF CONSCtOUSNESS

 1989): Blindsight subjects have to be prompted or cued to give their
better-than-chance "guesses." Thus the experimenter may have said,
in the initial instructions: "Whenever you hear a tone, make a guess"
or "Whenever you feel me tap your hand, make a response." Without
such cues, the subject simply fails to
      We can test our diagnosis of the difference by imagining a variation. Suppose we encountered a purported blindsight subject who
didn't have to be cued: she "spontaneously" issues "guesses" (well
above chance, but not perfect) whenever something is presented in the
purported blind field. We sit her down in the laboratory and do the
usual testing to map the supposed scotoma; she tells us whenever the
moving light disappears into her blind field, just like any other blind-sight subject. But at the same time she spontaneously volunteers remarks like "This is only a guess, but did you just shine a light in my
scotoma?" — but only just after we'd done just that. This would be
suspicious, to say the least, and we can say why.
     In general, when subjects comply with their instructions in an
experiment, this is seen as unproblematic evidence that they have been
able to comply with the instructions because they have consciously
experienced the relevant stimulus events. That's why the following
preparatory instruction would be viewed as nonsensical:

       Whenever you are conscious of the light going on, press the button
       on the left; whenever the light goes on but you are not conscious
       of it going on, press the button on the right.

     How on earth could a subject comply with this? You would be
asking the subject to do the impossible: to condition his behavior on
occurrences that are inaccessible to him. It would be like saying "raise
your hand whenever someone winks at you without your knowing it."

        4. The phflosopher Colin McGinn (1991) says of an imagined blindsight patient:
 'Behaviorally, she can function much like a sighted person; phenomenologically, she
 strikes herself as blind" (p. 111). ThIs is simply false; she cannot function behaviorally
 much like a sighted person at all. McGinn goes on to underscore his striking claim:
 "Besides, let's be naive for a minute, don't blindsight patients look very much as if they
 are having visual experiences when they make their surprising discriminations?. . They
                                                                                   .

 don't look the way people look when there is nothing experiential going on" (p. 112).
Again, this is false. They look In fact as if they were not having visual experiences.
becouse they hove to be cued, if they thdnt have to be cued, they would indeed look as
if they were having visual experiences — so much so that we wouldn't believe their
denials!

=== p. 329 ===

               DISMANTUNG THE WiTNESS PROTECTiON PROGRAM         329

An experimenter wouldn't feel the need to insert the adverb "consciously," as in
     Whenever you consciously hear a tone, make a guess
since the standard assumption is that one can't condition one's policies
on unconscious experiences, even if such things occur. To adopt the
policy
     Whenever x happens, do y
you have to be able to be conscious of x happening.
     That's our standard assumption, but this edifice of obviousness
has a crack in it. Haven't we learned that many of our behaviors are
governed by conditions that we only unconsciously detect? Consider
the policies regulating our body temperature, adjusting our metabolism,
storing and retrieving energy, activating our immune systems; consider
such policies as blinking when things approach or enter the eye, and
even such large-scale public behaviors as walking (without falling over)
and ducking when things suddenly loom at us. All this "behavior" is
controlled without any help from consciousness — as Descartes had
observed.
      It seems, then, that there are two kinds of behavioral policies:
those controlled by conscious thought and those controlled by "blind,
mechanical" processes — just like the processes that control an automated elevator, if an automated elevator is to adhere to the policy of
carrying no more than two thousand pounds, it must have some sort
of built-in scale to detect when this limit is surpassed. An automated
elevator is certainly not conscious, and detects nothing consciously,
and hence has no conscious policies. It can be said, however, to adhere
to policies that hinge on various states of the world that it detects, and
even to adjust the policies it adheres to on the basis of other states of
affairs it detects, and so forth. It can have policies, meta-policies. and
meta-meta-policies. all hinging on various complicated combinations
of detected states of affairs — and all without a hint of consciousness. Whatever an elevator can do in the way of detection and policy-following, a human brain and body can surely do as well. It can follow
 elaborate unconscious elevator-type policies.
       So what is the difference between unconscious policy-following
 and conscious policy-following? When we consider the policies our
 bodies follow unconsciously, thanks to "blind, mechanical" condition-detectors, it is tempting to say that since these are unconscious policies,
 they are not so much our policies as our bodies' policies. Our policies

=== p. 330 ===

 are (by definition, one might say) our conscious policies; the ones we
 formulate consciously and deliberately, with the opportunity to reflect
 (consciously) on their pros and cons, and the opportunity to adjust or
 amend them as the situation unfolds in our experience.
       So it seems that when a policy is initially adopted as a result of
 verbal discussion, or in response to verbal instructions, it is ipso facto
 a conscious policy, which must hinge on consciously experienced
 events (Marcel, 1988). What seems self-contradictory is the notion that
 one could talk it over and thereupon decide to follow an unconscious
 policy, hinging on unconsciously detected events. But there is, we can
 see, a loophole: The status of such a policy might change. With enough
 practice, and some strategically placed forgetfulness, we might start
 from a consciously adopted and followed policy and gradually move
 ourselves into the state of following an unconscious policy by detecting
 the relevant hfnges without being conscious of them. This could happen, but only if the link to the verbal consideration of the policy were
 somehow broken.
       This possible transition can be better envisaged going in the other
direction. Couldn't a blindsight subject become conscious of visual
experiences in the scotoma, by a reversal of the process just imagined?
After all, in blindsight the subject's brain manifestly does receive and
analyze the visual information that is somehow utilized in the good
guesswork. Shortly after the stimulus occurs, something happens in
the subject's brain that marks the onset of the informed state. if an
external observer (such as the experimenter) can arrange to recognize
these onsets, this observer could in principle pass on the information
to the subject. Thus the subject could come to recognize these onsets
"at second hand'• in spite of not being conscious of them "directly."
And then, shouldn't the subject be able in principle to "eliminate the
middleman" and come to recognize, just as the experimenter does, the
changes in his own dispositions? At the outset, it might require using
some sort of self-monitoring equipment — the same equfpment the experimenter relies on — but with the subject now looking at or listening
to the output
      In other words, shouldn't it be possible in principle to "close the

      5. "If he could listen to his own galvanic skin response, he'd be in better shape." —
Larry Weiskrantz, commenting on one of his blindsight patients, ZIF. Bielefeld, May
1990.

=== p. 331 ===

feedback loop" and thereby train the subject to follow a policy of conditioning his behavior on changes which he did not ("directly") experience? I raise the prospect of such training in blindsight as if it were
just a thought experiment, but in fact it could readily be turned into a
real experiment. We could try to train a blindsight subject to recognize
when to "guess."
       Subjects with blindsight are not unchanging in their talents and
dispositions; some days they are in better form than others; they do
improve with practice, in spite of the fact that they are usually not
provided with immediate feedback from the experimenter on how well
they are doing (for exceptions, see ZihI, 1980, 1981). There are several
reasons for this, chief of which is that any such experimental situation
is bedeviled with possibilities of unintended and unnoticed hints from
the experimenter, so interactions between experimenter and subject are
scrupulously minimized and controlled. Nevertheless, subjects feed on
the cuing or prompting they receive from the experimenter, and gradually accustom themselves to the otherwise weirdly unpromising practice of making hundreds or thousands of guesses on matters about which
they are convinced they have no experience whatever. (Imagine how
you would feel if you were asked to sit down with the telephone book
and guess what make of automobile each listed person owned, without
ever being told when you happened to guess correctly. It would not
seem a well-motivated activity for very long, unless you got some credible assurance about how well you were doing, and why this was a
stunt worth trying.)
       What would happen, then, if we were to throw other scientific
goals to the winds and see how much we could achieve by training
someone with blindsight, using whatever feedback seemed to help?
Suppose we begin with a standard blindsight subject, who "guesses"
whenever we cue him (the so-called forced-choice response), and whose
guesses are better than chance (if they aren't, he isn't a blindsight subject). Feedback would soon tune this to a maximum, and if the guessing
 leveled off at some agreeably high rate of accuracy, this should impress
on the subject that he had a useful and reliable talent that might be
worth exploiting. This is in fact the state that some blindsight subjects
are in today.
       Now suppose we start asking the subject to do without cuing —
to "guess when to guess," to guess "whenever the spirit moves you" —
 and again let's suppose that the experimenter provides instant feedback.
There are two possible outcomes:

=== p. 332 ===

      332   THE PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS OF CONSCOUSNESS

      (1) The subject starts at chance and stays there. In spite of the
          fact that the subject is measurably informed by the onset of
          the stimulus events, there seems to be no way the subject can
          discover when this informing has occurred, no matter what
          "biofeedback" crutches we lend him.
      (2) The subject eventually becomes able to work without a cue
          from the experimenter (or from any temporary biofeedback
          crutch), performing significantly above chance.

        Which outcome we would get in any particular case is of course
 an empirical matter, and I won't elzen hazard a guess on how likely a
 type-2 result might be. Perhaps in every single case, the subject would
 be unable to learn to "guess" correctly when to guess. But notice that
 if a type-2 result were to happen, the subject could then quite reasonably
 be asked to adopt policies that required him to hinge his behavior on
 stimuli whose occurrence he could only guess to occur. Whether or
 not he was conscious of these stimuli, if his "guessing" reliability was
 high, he could treat those stimuli on a par with any conscious experiences. He could think about, and decide upon, policies that hinged
 on their occurrence as readily as on the occurrence of events consciously experienced.
        But would this somehow make him conscious of the stimuli? What
 are your intuitions? When I have asked people what they would be
 inclined to say in such a case, I get mixed responses. Folk psychology
 does not yield a clear verdict. But a blindsight subject has spoken for
 himself about a similar circumstance. DB, one of the subjects studied
by Weiskrantz, has right hemianopia, and shows the classic blindsight
capacity to guess above chance when cued. For instance, if a light is
slowly moved across his scotoma horizontally or vertically and he is
prompted to guess "vertical or horizontal," he does extremely well,
while denying all consciousness of the motion. However, if the light
is moved more swiftly, it becomes sell-cuing: DB can volunteer without
prompting a highly accurate report of the motion, and even mimic the
motion with a hand gesture, as soon as it occurs (Weiskrantz, 1988,
1989). And when asked, DB insists that of course he consciously experiences the motion — how else would he be able to report it? (Other
blindsight subjects also report conscious experience of fast-moving
stimuli.) We may want to reserve judgment, but his response should
not surprise us, if Rosenthal's analysis of the ordinary concept of consciousness is on the right track. DB doesn't just come to be informed
about the motion of the light; he realizes he's come to be informed; in

=== p. 333 ===

Rosenthal's terms, he has a second-order thought to the effect that he's
just had a first-order thought.
      Otto, our critic, returns:
     But this is just more sleight of hand! We've always known that
     blindsight subjects were conscious of their guessing. All this
     shows is that such a subject might develop a talent for guessing
     when to guess (and, of           he would be conscious of those
     guesses). Coming to recognize that one's guesses on these topics
     were reliable would hardly in itself be sufficient for one to become
     directly conscious of the event one is guessing about.
      This suggests that something more is needed for visual consciousness. What might be added? For one thing, the connection between the
guess and the state it is about, while reliable, seems pretty thin and
ephemeral. Could it be thickened and strengthened? What would be
the result if the ties of aboutness between the guess and its object were
multiplied?

     3. HIDE THE THIMBLE: AN EXERCISE IN
        CONSCIOUSNESS-RAISING

      The standard philosophical term for aboutness is intentionality,
and according to Elizabeth Anscombe (1965) it "comes by metaphor"
from the Latin, intendere arcum in, which means to aim a bow and
arrow at (something). This image of aiming or directedness is central
in most philosophical discussions of intentionality, but in general philosophers have traded in the complex process of aiming a real arrow
for a mere "logical" arrow, a foundational or primitive relation, made
all the more mysterious by its supposed simplicity. How could something in your head point this abstract arrow at a thing in the world?°
Thinking of the aboutness relation as an abstract, logical relation may
in the end be right, but at the outset it deflects attention from the
processes that are actually involved in keeping a mind in enough contact with the things in the world so that they can be effectively thought
about: the processes of attending to, keeping in touch with, tracking
and trailing             unpublished). The actual business of aiming at
something, "keeping it in the                involves making a series of
adjustments and compensations over time, under "feedback control."

     6. My answer to this question is my book The Intentional Stonce (1987).

=== p. 334 ===

      334   THE PHILOSOPI-UCAL PROBLEMS OF CONSCIOUSNESS

That's why the presence of clouds of distractors (such as the chaff that
confounds antimissile systems) can make aiming impossible. Locking
on to a target long enough to identify it is an achievement that calls for
more than a single, momentary informational transaction. The best way
to keep in touch with something is, literally, to keep in touch with it —
to grab it and not let it get away, so that you can examine it to your
heart's content, in your own good time. The next best way is to keep
in touch with it figuratively, by tracking it with your eyes (and the rest
of your body), never letting it out of your sight. This is an achievement
that can be accomplished by perception, of course, but not just by
 passive perception; it may take some effort, some planning, and, in any
 event, continuing activity to keep in touch with something.
      When I was a child I loved to play the children's party game Hide
 the Thimble. An ordinary thimble is shown to all participants, and all
     one leave the room, while the thimble is "hidden." The rules for
  ae hider are clear: The thimble has to be hidden in plain sight. It may
 not be placed behind or under anything, or too high up for any of the
children to see. In the average living room there are dozens of places
you can place a thimble where it will tend to melt into its surroundings
like a well-camouflaged animal. Once it is hidden, the rest of the children come back in the room and proceed to hunt for the thimble. As
soon as you see the thimble you quietly sit down, trying not to betray
its location. The last few children to find the thimble can usually be
counted on to look right at the thimble several times without actually
seeing it. In these delicious moments, everyone else can see that the
thimble is right in front of Betsy's nose, let's say, well lit and subtending
a healthy angle in her visual field. (At such moments my mother liked
to say, "If it were a bear, it would bite you!") From the giggles and
gasps of the other children, Betsy may herself realize that she must be
staring right at it — and still not see it.
      We might put it this way: Even if some representational state in
Betsy's brain in some way "includes" the thimble, no perceptual state
of Betsy is about the thimble yet. We may grant that one of her conscious
states is about the thimble: her "search image." She may be fiercely
concentrating on finding the thimble, the very thimble she was allowed
to examine just a minute or two ago. But no strong relation of intentionality or aboutness yet holds between any of her perceptual states
and the thimble, even though there may well be information in some
state of her visual system that would make it possible for someone else
(an outside observer, for instance, studying the states of her visual
cortex) to locate or identify the thimble. What must happen is for Betsy

=== p. 335 ===

                   DiSMANTUNG THE WITNESS PROTECTION PROGRAM                     335

to "zero in on" the thimble, to separate it as "figure" from "ground"
and identify it. After that has happened, Betsy really does see the thimble. The thimble will finally be "in her conscious experience" — and
now that she is conscious of it, she will be able at last to raise her hand
in triumph — or go quietly to sit with the other children who have
already spotted the
      Such feedback-guided, error-corrected, gain-adjusted, purposeful
links are the prerequisite for the sort of acquaintance that deserves the
name — that can then serve as a hinge for policy, for instance. Once I
have seen something in this strong sense, I can "do something about
it" or do something because I saw it or as soon as I saw it. Individual
thimbles, once identified, are normally easy enough to keep track of
thereafter (unless of course you happen to be in a room full of thimbles
in an earthquake). Under normal circumstances, then, the elevated status the thimble achieves in Betsy's control system is not just for a
fleeting moment; the thimble will remain located by Betsy during reaching, or during time taken to reaffirm its identity, to check it again
(and again — if there are grounds for doubt). The things we are most
definitely conscious of are the items we frankly and unhurriedly observe, gathering in and integrating the fruits of many saccades, building up an acquaintance over time while keeping the object located in
personal space. if the object is darting around like a butterfly, we will
actually take action to immobilize it, "so we can look at it," and if
it is well camouflaged in its surroundings, we have to take steps —
literally, if we mustn't touch it — to get it in front of a contrasting
background.
      Our failure to do this may prevent us from seeing the object, in
an important and familiar sense of the term.°

        7. Is her identification of the thimble a subsequent effect of her becoming conscious
of it, or a prior cause of her becoming conscious of it? This is the question — Orwellian
or Stalinesque? — that the Multiple Drafts model teaches us not to ask.
        8. Under normal conditions, location ('spotting itS') and identification go hand in
hand; spotting the thing-to-be-Identified is a precondition for identifying it. But this
normal coincidence masks a striking fact: The identification machinery and the location
machinery are to a large degree Independent in the brain, located in different regions of
the cortex (Mishkln Ungerleider, and Macko, 1983), and hence capable of being shut
down independently. There are rare pathologies in which the subject can readily identify
what he is seeing without being able to locate it in personal space at all, and counterpatt
pathologies in which subjects can locate a visual stimulus — point to it, for instance —
and yet be very poor at identifying the object, in spite of having otherwise quite normal
vision. The psychologist Anne Treisman (1988; Treisman and Gelade. 1980; Treisman
and Sato, 1990; Treisman and Souther, 1985) has conducted an important series of

=== p. 336 ===

Birdwatchers often keep a life list of all the species they have seen.
Suppose you and I are birdwatchers, and we both hear a bird singing
in the trees above our heads; I look up and says "I see it—do you?"
You stare right where I am staring, and yet you say, truthfully, "No. I
don't see it." I get to write this bird on my list; you do not, in spite of
the fact that you may be morally certain that its image must have swum
repeatedly across your foveae.
      What would you say? Was the thimble somehow "present" in
Betsy's consciousness before she spotted it? Was the bird present in
the "background" of your consciousness, or not present at all? Getting
something into the forefront of your consciousness is getting it into a
position where it can be reported on, but what is required to get something into the background of your conscious experience (and not merely
into the background of your visible environment)? The thimble and the
bird were undoubtedly present in the visible environment — that's not
the issue. Presumably it's not sufficient for reflected light from the object
merely to enter your eyes, but what further effect must the reflected
light have — what further notice must your brain take of it — for the
object to pass from the ranks of the merely unconsciously responded
to into the background of conscious experience?
      The way to answer these "first-person point of view" stumpers is
to ignore the first-person point of view and examine what can be learned
from the third-person point of view. In chapters 8—10, we explored a
model of speech act production that depended on a Pandemonium
process in which the eventual mating of contents with expressions was
the culmination of competitions, the building, dismantling, and rebuilding of coalitions. Contents that entered that fray but did not manage to perpetuate themselves for long might send some sort of one-shot
"ballistic" effect rippling through the system, but would be close to
unreportabje. When an event doesn't linger, any attempt to report it.

experiments that support her claim that seeing should be distinguished from identifying. When something is seen, on her model, the brain sets up a "token" for the object.
Tokens are separate temporary episodic representations' — and their creation is the
preamble for their further identification, something that is accomplished by searching
one's semantic memory using a process of the sort that production systems model.
A token does not have to be defined by a definite location in personal space, however.
if I understand her model, and for these reasons it is not out of the question that subjects in Betsys State (before she found the thimble) could do better than chance if
prompted to make a forced-choice guess as to whether the thimble was currently in
their field of view or not. For experiments bearing on this, see Pollatsek, Rayner. and
Henderson (1990).

=== p. 337 ===

               DISMANTUNG THE WITNESS PROTEC11ON PROGRAM        337

if started, will either be aborted or will wander out of control, having
nothing against which to correct itself. For reportability, there must be
a capacity to identify and reidentify the effect. We can see the development of reportability in many varieties of training, reminiscent of
the training we imagine giving to our blindsight patient: the results of
palate-training in wine tasters, ear-training in musicians, and the like —
or the simple experiment with plucking the guitar string described in
chapter 3.
      Consider, for instance, the instructions given to apprentice piano
tuners. They are told to listen to the "beats" as they strike the key they
are tuning together with a reference key. What beats? At first, most
novices are unable to discern in their auditory experience anything
answering to the description "beats" — what they hear is something
they would describe as some sort of unstructured bad-soundingness or
out-of-tuneness. Eventually, though, if training is successful, they come
to be able to isolate, in their auditory experience, the interference
"beats," and to notice how the patterns of beats shift in response to
their turning of the tuning "hammer" on the peg. They can then readily
tune the piano by tuning out the beats. What they typically say — and
we can all confirm this with similar episodes in our own experience —
is that as a result of their training their conscious experience has
changed. More specifically, it has been augmented: they are now conscious of things they were not previously conscious of.
      Now in one sense, of course, they were hearing the beats all along.
It is the interference, after all, that composes the out-of-tuneness of
which they were certainly conscious. But they were previously unable
to detect these components in their experience, which is why one might
say that these factors contributed to but were not themselves present
in the experience. The functional status of such contributions prior to
training was the same as that of the events occurring in blindsight: the
subject is unable to report the particular contributions, or hinge policy
on their onset, but the results of these contributions can still be made
manifest in the subject's behavior, for instance in the subject's capacity
to answer artfully posed questions. What I am suggesting is that there
 is nothing more to being in the background of experience than that.
Now it's not out of the question, as we have seen, that a strengthened
 link of the sort we have just described for piano tuners and wine tasters
 could be built up in a blindsight subject to the point where he would
declaTe, and we would readily accept, that he had become conscious
of the stimuli — even in the forefront of his consciousness — which
 before he could only guess about.

=== p. 338 ===

     Not so fast. [says Otto.] Here's another objection: You imagine the
     blindsight subject learning to use his blindsight capacities in these
     new ways, and maybe that would give him a sort of consciousness
     of the events occurring in his blind field, but this still leaves
     something out. The consciousness wouldn't be visual consciousness; it wouldn't be like seeing. The "phenomenal qualities" or
     qualia of conscious vision would be missing, even if the blindsight
     subject could make all these functional moves.
      Maybe so, and maybe not. Just what are "phenomenal qualities"
or qualia? (Qualia is just the Latin for qualities; the singular is quale,
usually pronounced kwah '-lay.) They seem terribly obvious at first —
they're the way things look, smell, feel, sound to us — but they have
a way of changing their status or vanishing under scrutiny. In the next
chapter we'll track these suspects down through philosophical thickets,
but first we should get a better look at some properties that aren't
phenomenal qualities, but might be mistaken for them.

     4. PROSTHETIC VISION: WHAT, ASIDE FROM INFORMATION, IS
        STILL MISSING?

     Does Weiskrantz's subject, DB, see the motion? Well, he surely
doesn't hear it, or feel it. But is it vision? Does it have the "phenomenal
qualities" of vision? Weiskrantz says:
     As stimulus "salience" increases, the patient may say insistently
     that he still does not "see," but he now has a kind of "feeling"
     that something is there. In some cases, if the salience is increased
     still further, a point may be reached where the subject says he
     "sees" but the experience is not veridical. For example, DB "sees"
     in response to a vigorously moving stimulus, but he does not see
     it as a coherent moving object, but instead reports complex patterns of "waves." Other subjects report "dark shadows" emerging
     as brightness and contrast are increased to high levels. 11988, p. 1891

The vigorously moving object is not perceived by DB as having color
or shape, but so what? As we proved to ourselves in chapter 2, in the
experiment with the playing card held in peripheral vision, we can
certainly see the card without being able to identify either its colors or
its shapes. That's normal sight, not blindsight, so we should be reluctant
on those grounds to deny visual experience to the subject.
      The question of whether this abnormal way of obtaining infor-

=== p. 339 ===

   A blind subject with a 16-line portable electrical system. The TV camera is attached
   to the lens housing, mounted on a pair of spectacle frames. A small bundle of
   wires leads to an electrical stimulus drive circuitry (held in his right hand). The
   matrix of 256 concentric silver electrodes is held in his left hand.

mation about visible things would be a variety of seeing can be more
vividly posed if we turn to an even more radical departure from normal
vision. Prosthetic devices have been designed to provide ''vision" to
the blind, and some of them raise just the right issues. Almost twenty
years ago, Paul Bach-y-Rita (1972) developed several devices that involved small, ultralow-resolution video cameras that could be mounted
on eyeglass frames. The low-resolution signal from these cameras, a
16-by-16 or 20-by-20 array of "black and white*' pixels, was spread over
the back or belly of the subject in a grid of either electrical or mechanically vibrating tinglers called tactors.

=== p. 340 ===

  Appearance of a 400-count representation of a woman's face as seen on the monitor
  osciliscope. Subjects can correctly identify stimulus patterns of this level of complexity.

      After only a few hours of training, blind subjects wearing this
device could learn to interpret the patterns of tingles on their skin,
much as you can interpret letters traced on your skin by someone's
finger. The resolution is low, but even so, subjects could learn to read
signs, and identify objects and even people's faces, as we can gather
from looking at this photograph taken of the signal as it appears on an
oscilloscope monitor.
      The result was certainly prosthetically produced conscious perceptual experience, but since the input was spread over the subjects'
backs or bellies instead of their retinas, was it vision? Did it have the
"phenomenal qualities" of vision, or just of tactile sensation?

=== p. 341 ===

      Recall one of our experiments in chapter 3. It is quite easy for
your tactile point of view to extend out to the tip of a pencil, permitting
you to feel textures with the tip, while quite oblivious to the vibrations
of the pencil against your fingers. So it should not surprise us to learn
that a similar, if more extreme, effect was enjoyed by Bach-y-Rita's
subjects. After a brief training period, their awareness of the tingles on
their skin dropped out; the pad of pixels became transparent, one might
say, and the subjects' point of view shifted to the point of view of the
camera, mounted to the side of their heads. A striking demonstration
of the robustness of the shift in point of view was the behavior of an
experienced subject whose camera had a zoom-lens with a control button (pp. 98—99). The array of tinglers was on his back, and the camera
was mounted on the side of his head. When the experimenter without
warning touched the zoom button, causing the image on the subject's
back to expand or "loom" suddenly, the subject instinctively lurched
backward, raising his arms to protect his head. Another striking demonstration of the transparency of the tingles is the fact that subjects
who had been trained with the tingler-patch on their backs could adapt
almost immediately when the tingler-patch was shifted to their bellies
(p. 33). And yet, as Bach-y-Rita notes, they still responded to an itch
on the back as something to scratch — they didn't complain of "seeing"
it—and were perfectly able to attend to the tingles, as tingles, on
demand.
      These observations are tantalizing but inconclusive. One might
argue that once the use of the device's inputs became second nature
the subjects were really seeing, or, contrarily, that only some of the
most central "functional" features of seeing had been reproduced
prosthetically. What of the other "phenomenal qualities" of vision?
Bach-y-Rita reports the result of showing two trained subjects, blind
male college students, for the first time in their lives, photographs of
nude women from Playboy magazine. They were disappointed — "although they both could describe much of the content of the photographs, the experience had no affectual component; no pleasant feelings
were aroused. This greatly disturbed the two young men, who were
aware that similar photographs contained an affectual component for
their normally sighted friends" (p. 145).
      So Bach-y-Rita's prosthetic devices did not produce all the effects
of normal vision. Some of the shortfall must be due to the staggering
difference in the rate of information flow. Normat vision informs us
about the spatial properties of things in our environment at great speed
and with almost whatever level of detail we desire. It is not surprising

=== p. 342 ===

that low-resolution spatial information sent brainward via an interface
on the skin failed to stir up all the reactions that are stirred up in
normally sighted people when their visual systems are flooded with
input.9 How much pleasure would we expect a normally sighted person
to derive from looking at similarly low-resolution translations — glance
at Figure 11.4— of pictures of beautiful people?
       It is not clear how much would change if we somehow managed
to improve the            rate"'° of prosthetic vision to match normal vision. It might be that simply increasing the amount and rate of information, somehow providing higher-resolution bit-maps to the brain,
would suffice to produce the delight that is missing. Or rather some of
it. People born blind would be at a tremendous disadvantage to people
who have recently lost their sight, for they have built up none of the
specifically visual associations that no doubt play an important role in
the delight that sighted people take in their experiences, which remind
them of earlier visual experiences. It might also be that some of the
pleasure we take in visual experiences is the by-product of ancient
fossil traces of an earlier economy in our nervous systems, a topic raised
in chapter 7 that will be further explored in the next chapter.
      The same considerations apply to blindsight and any imagined
improvements in blindsight subjects' abilities. Discussions of blind-sight have tended to ignore just how paltry the information is that
blindsight subjects glean from their blind fields. It is one thing to be
able to guess, when prompted, whether a square or a circle was just presented in the blind field. It would be quite another to be able to guess
in detail, when prompted,what was just happening outside the window.

        9. For instance, the latency of response for some of these perceptual tasks, even
in trained subjects. is quite long — eight to fifteen seconds for various simple identifications. for instance (Bach.y.Rita. p. 103). This in itheif demonstrates that the information
flow of prosthetic vision is extremely sluggish. compared to normal vision,
        10. "Baud rate" is a standard term for rate of digital information flow (it means.
approximately: bits per second). For instance, if your computer communicates over telephone lines to other computers it may transmit its bit strings at 1200 baud or 2400 baud
or at a much higher rate. It takes a baud rate approximately four times as fast to transmit
high-resolution real-time animated pictures — a clear instance in which a picture is
indeed worth more than a thousand words. Regular television signals are analog, like a
phonograph record, rather than digital, like a compact disk, so its information-flow rate
is measured as bandwidth, rather than baud rate. The term antedates computers: Baudot
code, named after its inventor (as was Morse code), was the standard international telegraph code adopted in 1880, and the baud rate was the number of code elements per
second transmitted By using "baud rate" rather than "bandwidth," I don't mean to imply
that the brain's information-handling is best conceived in digital terms.

=== p. 343 ===

               DISMANTLING THE WffNESS PROTEC11ON PROGRAM         343

      We can use what we have learned about prosthetic vision to guide
our imagination about what it would be like for a blindsight subject to
regain more of the functions of vision. Let's try to imagine coming upon
a cortically blind person, who, after assiduous training. (1) has turned
his capacity to guess when to guess into second nature, (2) can play
Hide the Thimble with the best of them, and (3) has somehow managed
to increase the speed and detail of his guesswork by orders of magnitude. We encounter him reading the newspaper and chuckling at the
comics and ask him to explain himself. Here are three scenarios, in
ascending order of plausibility:
     (1) "Just guessing, of course! Can't see a darn thing, you know,
         but I've learned how to guess when to guess, and right now.
         for instance. I guess you're making a rude gesture at me, and
         screwing up your face into a look of utter disbelief."
     (2) "Well, what started out as sheer guesses gradually lost their
         status as guesses, as I came to trust them. They turned into
         presentiments, shall we say? I would suddenly just know that
         something was going on in my blind field. I could then express
         my knowledge, and act on my knowledge. Moreover, I then
         had meta-knowledge that I was in fact capable of such presentiments, and I could use this meta-knowledge in planning
         my actions and setting policies for myself. What began as
         conscious guesses turned into conscious presentiments, and
         now they come so fast and furious I can't even separate them.
         But I still can't see a darn thing! Not the way I used to! It isn't
         like seeing at all."
     (3) "Well, actually, it's very much like seeing. I now effortlessly
         act in the world on the basis of information gleaned by my eyes
         from my surroundings. Or I can be self-conscious about what
         I'm getting from my eyes if I want to be. Without the slightest
         hesitation I react to the colors of things, to their shapes, and
         locations, and I've lost all sense of the effort I expended to
         develop these talents and render them second nature."
     And yet we may still imagine our subject saying that something
is missing:

      "Qualia. My perceptual states do have qualia, of course, because
      they are conscious states, but back before I lost my sight, they
      used to have visual qualia, and now they don't, in spite of all
      my training."

=== p. 344 ===

      It may seem obvious to you that this makes sense, that it is just
what you would expect our subject to say. If so, the rest of the chapter
is for you, an exercise designed to shake that conviction, If you're
already beginning to doubt that this speech about qualia makes any
sense at all, you've probably anticipated some of the twists that our
story is about to take.

     5. "FILUNG IN" VERSUS FINDING OUT

     But the existence of this feeling of strangeness does not give us
     a reason for saying that every object we know wefi and which
     does not seem strange to us gives us a feeling of familiarity.
     — We think that, as it were, the place once filled by the feeling
     of strangeness must surely be occupied somehow.
     LUDWG WITTGENSTEIN (1953), 596

      In chapter 2, we saw that one of the reasons for believing in
dualism was that it promised to provide the "stuff dreams are made
of" — the purple cows and other figments of our imagination. And in
chapter 5 we saw the confusions that arose from the natural but misguided assumption that after the brain has arrived at a discrimination
or judgment, it re-presents the material on which its judgment is based,
for the enjoyment of the audience in the Cartesian Theater, filling in
the colors. This idea of          in            in the thinking of even
sophisticated theorists, and it is a dead giveaway of vestigial Cartesian
materialism. What is amusing is that those who use the term often
know better, but since they find the term irresistible, they cover themselves by putting it in scare-quotes.
      For instance, just about everyone describes the brain as "filling
in" the blind spot (my italics in all the examples):
          the neurologically well-known phenomenon of subjective
     "filling in" of the missing portion of a blind area in the visual
     field. [Libet, 1985b, p. 567]

        you can locate your own blind spot, and also demonstrate how
     a pattern is "filled in" or "completed" across the blind spot..
     [Hundert, 1987, p. 427]

=== p. 345 ===

There is also auditory "filling in." When we listen to speech, gaps in
the acoustic signal can be "filled in" — for instance, in the "phoneme
restoration effect" (Warren, 1970). Ray Jackendoff puts it this way:
     Consider, for example, speech perception with noisy or defective
     input — say, in the presence of an operating jet airplane or over
     a bad telephone connection. .. What one constructs.
                                        .                          .is not
                                                                       .

     just an intended meaning but a phonological structure as well:
     one "hears" more than the signal actually conveys            In other
     words, phonetic information is "filled in" from higher-level structures as well as from the acoustic signal; and though there is a
     difference in how it is derived, there is no qualitative difference
     in the completed structure itself. [Jackendoff, 1987, p. 99]

    And when we read text, something similar (but visual) occurs: As
Bernard Baars puts it:
     We find similar phenomena in the well-known "proofreader effect," the general finding that spelling errors in page proofs are
     difficult to detect because the mind "fills in" the correct information. (Baars, 1988, p. 173J
Howard Margolis adds an uncontroversial commentary on the whole
business of "filling in":
     The "filled-in" details are ordinarily correct. [Margolis, 1987,
     p. 41)

      Tacit recognition that there is something fishy about the idea of
"filling in" is nicely manifested in this description of the blind spot
by the philosopher C. L. Hardin, in his book Color for Philosophers:
     It covers an area with a 6 degree visual diameter, enough to hold
     the images of ten full moons placed end to end, and yet there is
     no hole in the corresponding region of the visual field. This is
     because the eye-brain fills in with whatever is seen in the adjoining
     regions. if that is blue, it fills in blue; if it is plaid, we are aware
     of no discontinuity in the expanse of plaid. [1988, p. 221

       Hardin just can't bring himself to say that the brain fills in the
plaid, for this suggests, surely, quite a sophisticated bit of "construction," like the fancy "invisible mending" you can pay good money for
to fill in the hole in your herringbone jacket: all the lines line up, and

=== p. 346 ===

 all the shades of color match across the boundary between old and new.
 It seems that filling in blue is one thing — all it would take is a swipe
 or two with a cerebral paintbrush loaded with the right color; but filling
 in plaid is something         and it is more than he can bring himself to
 assert.
       But as Hardin's comment reminds us, we &e just as oblivious of
our blind spots when confronting a field of plaid as when confronting
 a uniformly colored expanse, so whatever it takes to create that oblivion
 can as readily be accomplished by the brain in either case. "We are aware
of no discontinuity," as he says. But if the brain doesn't have to fill in
the gap with plaid, why should it bother filling in the gap with blue?
       In neither case, presumably, is "filling in" a matter of literally
filling in — of the sort that would require something like paintbrushes.
 (This was the moral of the story of the CADBL!ND M&k II in chapter
8.) I take it that no one thinks that "filling in" is a matter of the brain's
actually going to the trouble of covering some spatial expanse with
pigment. We know that the real, upside-down image on the retina is
the last stage of vision at which there is anything colored in the unproblematic way that an image on a movie screen is colored. Since
there is no literal mind's eye, there is no use for pigment in the brain.
       So much for pigment. But still, we may be inclined to think that
there is something that happens in the brain that is in some important
way analogous to covering an area with pigment — otherwise we
wouldn't want to talk of "filling in" at all. It is this special happening,
whatever it is, that occurs in the special "medium" of visual or auditory
experience, apparently. As Jackendoff says, speaking of the auditory
case, "one 'hears' more than the signal actually conveys" — but note
that still he puts         in scare-quotes. What could it be that is present
when one "hears" sounds filling silent times or "sees" colors spanning
empty spaces? It does seem that something is there in these cases.
something the brain has to provide (by "filling in"). What should we
call this unknown whatever-it-is? Let's call it figment. The temptation,
then, is to suppose that there is something, made out of figment, which
is there when the brain "fills in" and not there when it doesn't bother
"filling in." Put so baldly, the idea of figment will not appeal to many
people. (At least I hope it doesn't.) We know better: there is no such
stuff as figment. The brain doesn't make figment; the brain              use
figment to fill in the gaps; figment is just a figment of my imagination.
So much for figment! But          what does "filling in" mean, what could
it mean, if it doesn't mean filling in with figment? If there is no such

=== p. 347 ===

medium as figment, how does "filling in" differ from not bothering to
fill in?
       In chapter 10, we saw how a CAD system could represent colors
by associating a color number with each pixel, or with each delineated
region of the object depicted, and we saw how the CADBLIND Mark II
could search for, or detect, colors by reading such a code. This process
is reminiscent of the children's pastime, color-by-numbers, which provides a simple analogue of the representation processes that must occur,
or might occur, in the brain. Figure 11.5 is a representation that has
information about shapes, but no information about colors at all.

                               Figure 11,5
      Compare it with Figure 11.6, which has information about colors
in the form of a numbered code. if you were to take some crayons and
follow the directions for filling in the colors, you could turn Figure
11.6 into yet another sort of "filled in" representation — one in which
the regions were filled in with real color, real pigment.
      There is still another way the color could be "filled in" pixel by
pixel, by a coded bit-map, as in Figure 11.7.
      Figures 11.6 and 11.7 are both sorts of filling in (compared to
Figure 11.5, for example),since any procedure that needs to be informed
about the color of a region can, by mechanical inspection of that region,
extract that information. This is purely informational filling-in. The
systems are entirely arbitrary, of course. We can readily construct in-

=== p. 348 ===

      MMM    aa-M MM M                        MM MM M
                --             -- M MMMM
      MMMMa
      MM MM                        M    MM MM
       'MMMM'aa' —— MMMMM
      -MMMM-aa-'
      —MMMM—aa— -MMMMMM
                 -'MMMMMM
      MM                                          M
      MM              -a  OS

                                                                                   —    —
             www---aa                                                              cow—
                                                  wwwwww——aaa             —        0)   CD
                                            —   U'UIUIU'U'U'w—
      ——a—
      --a-ma—ama—-aaawts- - -             wUIUIUIUIUIUIUI— — —aaaww— — —         to
                          - as                    a    aa ---

—
I.e
•
I.4
      --a—

      - MM —
      MMMM-MMM'
         -a
        -a
           M
           maw
      MM-.-'
                          —
                          —

                          —

                          —
                            sa—- a a a a wwwwwlawwaaaa
                               a
                               aw
                               au'aaaa—
                               a
                               aa
                               aa
                                 a a COW 10 law to cow
                        -- - - - -
                                                        aa——
                                            wwwwwwsawwaaaa      aau,aa—
                                                         waaaaaaa—
                                                              aaaaa—
                                                              aaa
                                                            aUIUIUI
                                                      swwsaaaa-     —
                                                                      a——
                                                                          —
                                                                          —
                                                                        — —
                                                                        — —
                                                       'S a a a aaa a - - -
                                                                               —

                                                                    —— — — —         ci a
      MM MM a a a a a a 'S 'S (.5 a a a a a all' a
      MMMMaaaaaasaaawa —
       - -
      MM
      MMMaaaa
      MMaaaaaawaau.aaa
      MM a a a a wa Cnaa aa a a aa
      MM aa a aw
                  a a a a a a a a a a a law a
                     a*
                   aaaaaaaaa aaw
                     waa        aa
                                     —aw aa
                                        'sa
                                                                    —— — — —
                                                                           '
                                                                    —— — — —
                                                                           —
                                                                    —— — — —
                                                                                   -COD
                                                                                   S C
      MM         aaaa  a a 'sa
                           a      aaaa                              —— — — —
      MM aa  law law
         aa aa       a am
      MMMM-' -aaaaaaaaaa   law
                             a alaw aaa a                    -- -- -- -- -MMMM                             wa-a
                                       a                               -- -am
                                    OSaM              MMMMMM --- - -
      —    MM                      MMOSM     MMMMMMMMM
      —    M                       MMMM       MMMMMMMM
                                    MMM       MMMMMMMM — — — —
                                     MMM' 'MMMMMMMMMMM.
                               MMMMMM' -'MMMMMMMMMMM. — — — —

=== p. 349 ===

definitely many functionally equivalent systems of representation —
involving different coding systems, or different media.
      if you make a colored picture on your personal computer using
the PC-Paintbrush program, the screen you see is represented in the
machine as a bit-map in the "frame buffer," analogous to Figure 11.7,
but when you go to store the picture on a disk, a compression algorithm
translates it into something similar to Figure 11.6. It divides the area
into like-colored regions, and stores the region boundaries and their
color number in an "archive" file." An archive file is just as accurate
as a bit-map, but by generalizing over regions, and labeling each region
only once, it is a more efficient system of representation.
      A bit-map, by explicitly labeling each pixel, is a form of what we
may call roughly continuous representation — the roughness is a function of the size of the pixels. A bit-map is not literally an image, but
just an array of values, a sort of recipe for forming an image. The array
can be stored in any system that preserves information about location.
Videotape is yet another medium of roughly continuous representation,
but what it stores on the tape is not literally images, but recipes (at a
different grain level) for forming images.
      Another way of storing the image on your computer screen would
be to take a color photograph, and store the image on, say, a 35mm
slide, and this is importantly different from the other systems, in an
obvious way: there is actual dye, literally filling in a region of real
space. Like the bit-map, this is a roughly continuous representation of
the depicted spatial regions (continuous down to the grain of the film —
at a fine enough scale, it becomes pixel-like or granular). But unlike
the bit-map, color is used to represent color. A color negative also uses
color to represent color, but in an inverted mapping.
      Here, then, are three ways of "filling in" color information: colorby-numbers, as in Figure 11.6 or an archive file, color-by-bit-map, as
in Figure 11.7 or frame buffers or videotape, and color-by-colors. Colorby-numbers is in one regard a way of "filling in" color information,
but it achieves its efficiency, compared to the others, precisely because
it does not bother filling in values explicitly for each pixel. Now in
which of these senses (if any) does the brain "fill in" the blind spot?
No one thinks that the brain uses numbers m registers to code for colors,
but that's a red herring. Numbers in registers can be understood just to

      11. There are other sorts of compression algorithms that do not rely on breaking
the image into same-colored regions in just this way, but I will not discuss them.

=== p. 350 ===

stand for any system of magnitudes, an:r system of "vectors," that a
brain might employ as a "code" for col'rs; it might be neural firing
frequencies, or some system of addresses or locations in neural networks, or any other system of physical variations in the brain you like.
 Numbers in registers have the nice propeity of preserving relationships
 between physical magnitudes while remaining neutral about any "intrinsic" properties of such magnitudes. sü they can stand for any physical magnitudes in the brain that "code for" colors. Although numbers
can be used in an entirely arbitrary way, they can also be used in
nonarbitrary ways, to reflect the structural relations between colors that
have been discovered. The familiar "cokir solid," in which hue, saturation, and lightness are the three dimen9ions along which our colors
vary,'2 is a logical space ideally suited to a numerical treatment — any
numerical treatment that reflects the betweenness relations, the oppositional and complementary relations, and so on, that human sight
actually exhibits. The more we learn about how the brain codes colors,
the more powerful and nonarbitrary a numerical model of human color
vision we will be able to devise.
       The trouble with speaking of the brain "coding" for colors by
using intensities or magnitudes of one th ng or other is that it suggests
to the unwary that eventually these            have to be decoded, getting
us "back to color." That is one route -— perhaps the most popular
route — back to figment: one imagines that the brain might unconsciously store its encyclopedic information about color in a format
something like that of Figure 11.8 but then arrange to have the representation "decoded" into "real colors" on special occasions — like running a videocassette, to project real coloi on a screen. There certainly
is a difference in phenomenology between just recalling the proposition
that the flag is red, white, and blue, and actually imagining the flag "in
color" and "seeing" (with the mind's eve) that it is red, white, and
blue. If this contrast in phenomenology rnspires some people to posit

       12. Other creatures have different color solid5 — or hypersolids! We are "trichro.
mats": we have three different types of photopigmented transducer cells in the cones in
our retinas. Other species, such as pigeons, are tetra hromats; their subjective color space
would have to be represented, numerically, as a our-dimensional hyperspace. Other
species are dichromats, all of whose color                  could be mapped onto a single
two-dimensional plane. (Note that "black and white is just a one-dimensional representational scheme, with all the possible grays representable as different distances on a
line between 0 and 1.) For reflections on the nnplications of this incommensurability of
color systems, see Hardin (1988) and Thompson. Pilacios, and Varela (in press).

=== p. 351 ===

                       1•BIue                 4•GoId
                      2• Grey                 5. Black
                      3-White                 6- Red

figment, an even more compelling case is provided by the phenomenon
of neon color spreading (van Tuijl, 1975), an example of which can be
seen on the back dust jacket of this book.
     The pink you see filling in the ring defined by the red lines is not
a result of pink smudging on the page, or light scattering. There is no
pink on your retinal image, in other words, in addition to the red lines.
Now how might this illusion be explained? One brain circuit, specializing in shape, is misled to distinguish a particular bounded region:
the ring with its "subjective contours." Subjective contours are produced by many similar figures, such as these.

             \\\ ///
             /                           C                  >

=== p. 352 ===

Another brain circuit, specializing in color but rather poor on shape
and location, comes up with a color discrimination (pink #97, let's
say) with which to "label" something in the vicinity, and the label gets
attached (or "bound") to the whole region.
     Why these particular discriminations should occur under these
conditions is still controversial, but the controversy concerns the causal
mechanisms that lead to mislabeling the region, not the further "prod-

                             1       1     1
                             1       1     1
                       97974979749797 49797
                      ?9797 4 9797 4 979749797S
                      ^9797 49797 4979749797$
                         ?97 1           1          197 <
                             1           1          1

                                 \

=== p. 353 ===

ucts" (if any) of the visual system. But isn't something missing? I have
stopped short at an explanation that provides a labeled color-by-numbers region: Doesn't that recipe for a colored image have to be executed
somewhere? Doesn't pink #97 have to be "filled in"? After all, you may
be tempted to insist, you see the pink! You certainly don't see an
outlined region with a number written in it. The pink you see is not
in the outside world (it isn't pigment or dye or "colored light"), so it
must be "in here" — pink figment, in other words.
       We must be careful to distinguish the "pink figment" hypothesis
from others that would be legitimate alternatives to an explanation that
stopped short with the color-by-numbers suggestion. For instance, it
might turn out that somewhere in the brain there is a roughly continuous representation of colored regions — a bit-map — such that "each
pixel" in the region has to be labeled "color #97," more or less in the
fashion of Figure 11.11.
       This is an empirical possibility. We could devise experiments to
 confirm or disconfirm it. The question would be: Is there a representational medium in the brain in which the value of some variable parameter (the intensity or whatever that codes for color) has to be
 propagated across or replicated across the relevant pixels of an array,
 or is there just a "single label" of the region, with no further "filling
 in" or "spreading out" required? What sort of experiments could favor
 such a model of the neon color spreading effect? Well, it would be
 impressive, for instance, if the color could be shown under some conditions to spread slowly in time — bleeding out from the central red
 lines and gradually reaching out to the subjective contour boundaries.'3
 I don't want to prejudge the question, for my main purpose
                                                                 in raising
 it is to illustrate my claim that whereas there are plenty of unresolved
 empirical questions about how the neon color spreading phenomenon
  happens in the brain, none of them involve differences over whether
  or not figment is generated in a "decoding" of the neural coding system.
        The question of whether the brain "fills in" in one way or another

         13. As if in response to this suggestion. V. S. Ramachandran and R. L. Gregory
 (submitted) have just performed some experiments with what they call (misteadingly, I
 think) artificially induced scotomas. in which there is good evidence of gradual filling
 in of textures and details. There is one fundamental difference between their experimental
 circumstances and the conditions I have been describthg: in their experiments there is
 competition between two sources of information, and one gets overruled (gradually). The
 phenomenon of gradual spatial tilling in of textures is an important discovery, but it
 does not take us beyond a model in the spirit of Figure 11.11. And further
                                                                                  questions
 about these experiments need to be resolved before their interpretation can be settled.

=== p. 354 ===

 is not a question on which introspection by itself can bear, for as we
 saw in chapter 4, introspection provides us — the subject as well as
  the "outside" experimenter — only with the content of representation,
  not with the features of the representational medium itself. For evidence
 about the medium, we need to conduct further                        But for
 some phenomena, we can already be quite sure that the medium of
 representation is a version of something efficient, like color-by-numbers, not roughly continuous, like bit-mapping.
       Consider how the brain must deal with wallpaper, for instance.
 Suppose you walk into a room and notice that the wallpaper is a regular
 array of hundreds of identical sailboats, or — let's pay homage to Andy
 Warhol — identical photographic portraits of Marilyn Monroe. In order
 to identify a picture as a portrait of Marilyn Monroe, you have to foveate
 the picture: the image has to fall on the high-resolution foveae of your
 eyes. As we saw in the playing card experiment in chapter 2, your
 parafoveal vision (served by the rest of the retina) does not have very
 good resolution; you can't even identify a jack of diamonds held at
 arm's length. Yet we know that if you were to enter a room whose walls
were papered with identical photos of Marilyn Monroe, you would
"instantly" see that this was the case. You would see in a fraction of
a second that there were "lots and lots of identical, detailed, focused
portraits of Marilyn Monroe." Since your eyes saccade four or five times
a second at most, you could foveate only one or two Marilyns in the
time it takes you to jump to the conclusion and thereupon to see
hundreds of identical Marilyns. We know that parafoveal vision could
not distinguish Marilyn from various Marilyn-shaped blobs, but nevertheless, what you see is not wallpaper of Marilyn-in-the-middle surrounded by various indistinct Marilyn-shaped blobs.
      Now, is it possible that the brain takes one of its high-resolution
foveal views of Marilyn and reproduces it, as if by photocopying, across
an internal mapping of the expanse of wall? That is the only way the
high-resolution details you used to identify Marilyn could "get into the
background" at all, since parafoveal vision is not sharp enough to provide it by itself. I suppose i is possible in principle, but the brain

      14. For instance, Roger Shepard's initial experiments with the mental rotation of
cube diagrams showed that it certainly seemed to subjects that they harbored roughly
continuously rotating representations ol the shapes they were imagining, but it took
further experiments, probing the actual temporal properties of the underlying representations. to provide (partial) confirmation of the hypothesis that they were actually doing
what II seemed to them they were doing. (See Shepard and Cooper. 1982.1

=== p. 355 ===

                 DISMANTLING THE WITNESS PROTEC11ON PROGRAM               355

almost certainly does not go to the trouble of doing that filling in!
Having identified a single Marilyn, and having received no information
to the effect that the other blobs are not Marilyns, it jumps to the
conclusion that the rest are Marilyns, and labels the whole region "more
Marilyns" without any further rendering of Marilyn at
       Of course it does not seem that way to you. It seems to you as if
you are actually seeing hundreds of identical Marilyns. And in one
sense you are: there are, indeed, hundreds of identical Marilyns out
there on the wall, and you're seeing them. What is not the case, however,
is that there are hundreds of identical Marilyns represented in your
brain. Your brain just somehow represents that there are hundreds of
identical Marilyns, and no matter how vivid your impression is that
you see all that detail, the detail is in the world, not in your head. And
no figment gets used up in rendering the seeming, for the seeming isn't
rendered at all, not even as a bit-map.
        So now we can answer our question about the blind spot. The
 brain doesn't have to "fill in" for the blind spot, since the region in
 which the blind spot falls is already labeled (e.g., "plaid" or "Marilyns"
 or just "more of the same"). If the brain received contradictory evidence
 from some region, it would abandon or adjust its generalization, but
 not getting any evidence from the blind spot region is not the same as
 getting contradictory evidence. The absence of confirming evidence
 from the blind spot region is no problem for the brain; since the brain
 has no precedent of getting information from that gap of the retina, it
 has not developed any epistemically hungry agencies demanding to be
 fed from that region. Among all the homunculi of vision, not a single
 one has the role of coordinating information from that region of the
 eye, so when no information arrives from those sources, no one complains. The area is simply neglected. In other words, all normally
  sighted people "suffer" from a tiny bit of "anosognosia." We are unaware of our "deficit" — of the fact that we are receiving no visual information from our blind spots. (A good overview of anosognosia is
  McGlynn and Schacter, 1989.)
        The blind spot is a spatial hole, but there can be temporal holes
  as well. The smallest are the gaps that occur while our eyes dart about
  during saccades. We don't notice these gaps, but they don't have to be
  filled in because we're designed not to notice them. The temporal analogues of scotomata might be the "absences" that occur during petit

        15. In Appendix B, I will suggest some 'experiments with wallpaper" that would
 put this empirical claim on the line.

=== p. 356 ===

 mal epileptic seizures. These are noticeable by the sufferer, but
                                                                       only
 by inference: they can't "see the edges" any more than you can
                                                                    see the
 edges of your blind spot, but they can be struck, retrospectively, by
 discontinuities in the events they have experienced.
       The fundamental flaw in the idea of "filling in" is that it suggests
 that the brain is providing something when in fact the brain is ignoring
  something. And this leads even very sophisticated thinkers to make
  crashing mistakes, perfectly epitomized by Edelman: "One of the most
  striking features of consciousness is its continuity" (1989, p. 119). This
  is utterly wrong. One of the most striking features of consciousness
                                                                          is
  its discontinuity — as revealed in the blind spot, and saccadic gaps, to
  take the simplest examples. The discontinuity of consciousness is striking because of the apparent continuity of consciousness. Neumann
  (1990) points out that consciousness may in general be a gappy phenomenon, and as long as the temporal edges of the gaps are not positively perceived, there will be no sense of the gappiness of the "stream"
 of consciousness. As Minsky puts it, "Nothing can seem jerky except
 what is represented as jerky. Paradoxically, our sense of continuity
 comes from our marvelous insensitivity to most kinds of changes rather
 than from any genuine perceptiveness" (1985, p. 257).

      6. NEGLECT AS A PATHOLOGICAL LOSS OF                        APPETITE
     The brain's motto for handling the blind spot could be: Ask me
no questions and I'll tell you no lies. As we saw in chapter 1, so long
as the brain assuages whatever epistemic hunger is around,
                                                                    there is
 nothing more it needs to do. But what about those occasions when there
 is much less epistemic hunger than there ought to be? These are
                                                                          the
 pathologies of neglect.
      One of the most familiar forms of neglect is hemi-neglect, in which
 one side of the body, usually the left side, is entirely neglected, due to
 brain damage on the opposite side. Not only the left side of the body,
but also the left side of the immediate vicinity is neglected. If a group
of people stand around the bed of the left-neglect patient, he will
                                                                        look
only at the people standing to his right; if asked to count the people
in the room, he will tend to overlook the people on the left, and if
someone on the left tries to attract his attention, this will typically fail.
And yet it can be shown that the patient's sense organs are still taking
in, and analyzing, and responding in various ways to the stimuli occurring on the left. What can be going on in the patient's head? Is the

=== p. 357 ===

"left side of phenomenal space a blank"? Or does the patient's "mind's
eye" fail to see the material that the brain provides for it on the left
side of. the stage in the Cartesian Theater?
         .   .

      There is a simpler explanation, not in terms of inner representations with curious properties, but in terms of—neglect—in the political sense! Daniel Patrick Moynihan notoriously recommended that
certain problems of race relations in America would resolve themselves
if we treated them with "benign neglect" — if Washington and the rest
of the nation would simply ignore them for a while. I don't think that
was good advice, but Moynihan was right about something: There certainly are circumstances where benign neglect is called for — such as
our treatment of the blind spot problem.
       There are no homunculi, as I have put it, who are supposed to
"care about" information arising from the part of the visual field covered
by the blind spot, so when nothing arrives, there is no one to complain.
Perhaps the difference between us and sufferers of pathological neglect
or other forms of anosognosia is that some of their complainers have
been killed. This theory has been proposed, in less colorful terms, by
 the neuropsychologist Marcel Kinsbourne (1980), who calls the inner
 complainers "cortical analyzers." In terms of the model we have developed, neglect could be described as a loss of political clout by certain
 parties of demons in the brain, due, in many but not all cases, to the
 death or suppression of their Representative. These demons are still
 active, trying to do their various things and even succeeding on occasion, but they no longer can win out in certain competitions against
 better-organized coalitions.
       On this model, the benign neglect of our blind spots shades almost
 imperceptibly into the various mildly dysfunctional neglects we all
 suffer from, and then into the most bizarre neglects studied by neurologists. For instance, I myself suffer from several rather common
 forms of neglect. Least serious, but sometimes embarrassing, is my typo
 neglect. I am pathologically unable to notice typographical errors in
 my page proofs when 1 read them over, and only by the most laborious
 exercises of concentration and focusing can I overcome this. It is not,
 as Baars suggested, that my brain "fills in" the correct spelling; it doesn't
 have to "fill in" since it does not normally pay enough attention to
  these matters to notice the errors; its attention gets captured by other
  features of the words on the page. Another of my mild disabilities is
  student examination neglect. It is just amazing how attractive the prospect of washing the kitchen floor or changing my shelf paper or balancing my checkbook becomes when I have a pile of exams on my desk

=== p. 358 ===

 that need grading. This feature, the heightened interest in alternatives,
 is particularly evident in hemi-neglect; to a first approximation, the
 farther to the right something is, the more noteworthy it is to a left
 hemi-neglect patient. Perhaps my most serious form of neglect, however, is my bad case of finances neglect. So little do I like balancing
 my checkbook, in fact, that only some truly awful alternative, such as
 grading student exams, can force my attention to the topic. This neglect
 has serious consequences for my welfare, consequences that I can readily be brought to appreciate, but in spite of this alarmingly unsuccessful
 appeal to my underlying rationality, I manage to persist in my neglect,
 unless fairly drastic measures of self-manipulation are brought into play.
       It is not that I can't see my checkbook but that I         look at it.
 And although in cool, reflective moments such as these, I can report
 all this (proving that I am not deeply anosognosic about my own disability), in the normal course of events part of what I don't notice is
 my own neglect of my finances. Mild anosognosia, in short. From this
 perspective, the only thing startling about the bizarre forms of neglect
 studied by neuropsychologists is the topic boundaries. Imagine someone neglecting everything on the left (Bisiach and Luzzatti, 1978; Bis-iach, 1988; Bisiach and Vallar, 1988; Calvanio, Petrone, and Levine,
 1987). Or imagine someone who had lost color vision but had no complaint (Geschwind and Fusillo, 1966). Or even, imagine someone who
 has gone blind, but hasn't yet noticed this profound loss — Anton's
syndrome or blindness denial (Anton, 1899; McGlynn and Schacter,
 1989, pp. 154—158).
       These conditions are readily explainable on the Multiple Drafts
theory of consciousness, for the central Witness has been replaced by
coalitions of specialists whose particular epistemic hungers cannot be
immediately adopted by other agents if they are expunged or on holiday.16 When these epistemic hungers vanish, they vanish without a
trace, leaving the field to other coalitions, other agents with other
agendas.
       But the same principle that accounts for neglect provides an alternative scenario for the "missing visual qualia" of our imagined blind-sight virtuoso. I suggested that it is possible that if he complains of the
absence of qualia, he might simply be noticing the relative paucity of

       16. For a contrast, see Bislach et al. (1986) and McGlynn and Schacter (1989).
whose models of anosognosia are similar, but are committed to the 'boxology" of separate
systems, especially McGlynn and Schacter, who posit a conscious awareness system.
that takes inputs from modules.

=== p. 359 ===

information he now gets from his vision and misdescribing it. I went
on to speculate that if somehow we could increase the "baud rate" of
his information-gathering, some if not all of the gap between his kind
of vision and normal vision could be closed. Now we can see that
another, cheaper way of closing the same gap would be simply to lower
his epistemic hunger, or obtund his visual curiosity in some way. After
all, if in Anton's syndrome a person can be utterly blind and not yet
realize it, a bit of strategically placed neglect could turn our blindsight
subject who complains of the loss of visual qualia into an uncomplaining subject who declares his vision to be flawlessly restored. It may
seem that we would know better, but would we? Would anything be
missing in such a person? There isn't any figment in normal vision, so
it can't be the figment that's missing. What else could it be?

     7. VIRTUAL PRESENCE

     We have the sense of actuality when every question asked of
     our visual systems is answered so swiftly that it seems as though
     those answers were already there.
     MARVIN MINSKY (1985). p. 257

     Once again, the absence of representation is not the same as the
representation of absence. And the representation of presence is not
the same as the presence of representation. But this is hard to believe.
Our conviction that we are somehow directly acquainted with special
properties or features in our experience is one of the most powerful
intuitions confronting anyone trying to develop a good theory of consciousness. I've been chipping away at it, trying to undermine its authority, but there's still more work to be done. Otto has yet another
tack to try:
      Your point about the Marilyns in the wallpaper is actually a backhanded defense of dualism. You argue very persuasively that there
      aren't hundreds of high-resolution Marilyns in the brain, and then
      conclude that there aren't any anywhere! But I argue that since
      what I see is hundreds of high-resolution Marilyns. then since, as
      you argue, they aren't anywhere in my brain, they must be somewhere else — in my nonphysical mind!
      The hundreds of Marilyns in the wallpaper seem to be present in
 your experience, seem to be in your mind, not just on the wall. But

=== p. 360 ===

 since, as we know your gaze can shift in a fraction of a second to draw
  information from any part of your visual environment, why should
  your brain bother importing all those Marilyns in the first place? Why
  not just let the world store them, at no cost, until theyre needed?
        Compare the brain to a library. Some research libraries are gigantic
  storehouses, containing within their walls millions of books, all quite
  readily accessible in the stacks. Other libraries keep fewer books on
  hand, but have a generous and efficient accessions system, buying whatever books the library users demand, or borrowing them from other
  libraries, using a swift interlibrary loan system. If you don't keep the
 books stored on the premises, the delays in access are greater, but not
 much greater. We can imagine an electronic interlibrary loan system
 (using fax or computer files) that could obtain a book from the outside
 world faster than the swiftest runner could fetch the book from the
 stacks. A computer scientist might say of the books in such a system
 that they were "virtually present" in the library all along, or that the
 library's "virtual collection" was hundreds or thousands of times
 greater than its actual hard-copy collection.
       Now how could we, as Users of our own brain-libraries, know
 which of the items we retrieve were there all along, and which our
 brains sent out for, in swift information-gathering forays into the external world? Careful experiments, conducted according to the heter-ophenomenological method, can answer this question, but
 introspection by itself simply can't tell. That doesn't stop us from thinking we can tell, however. In the absence of any evidence one way or
the other, our natural tendency is to jump to the conclusion that more
is present. I have called this the Introspective Trap (Dennett, 1969,
                                                                         pp.
139—140) and Minsky calls it the Immanence Illusion: "Whenever you
can answer a question without a noticeable delay, it seems as though
that answer were already active in your mind" (Minsky, 1985, p. 155).
       The interlibrary loan system is a useful but incomplete analogy,
for your brain doesn't just have facilities for acquiring information about
whatever external topics happen to interest you; it also has literally
millions of sentries almost continuously gazing at a portion of the external world, ready to sound the alarm and draw your attention to
anything novel and relevant happening in the world. In vision, this is
accomplished by the parafoveal rods and cones of the retinas, and the
neural agents inboard of these sentries who specialize in detecting
change and motion. If one of these agents sounds the alarm — "Change
in my sector!' — this almost instantaneously triggers a saccade, bring-

=== p. 361 ===

               DISMANTUNG ThE WITNESS PROTECTiON PROGRAM           361

ing the fovea to bear on the region of interest, so the novelty can be
located, identified, dealt with. The sentry system is so reliable that it's
hard to sneak a change into the visible world without the whole visual
system being informed of it, but with the aid of high-tech trickery, the
sentries can sometimes be bypassed, with astonishing results.
      When your eyes dart about in saccades, the muscular contractions
that cause the eyeballs to rotate are ballistic actions: your fixation points
are unguided missiles whose trajectories at lift-off determine where and
when they will hit ground zero at a new target. For instance, if you are
reading text on a computer screen, your eyes will leap along a few
words with each saccade, farther and faster the better a reader you are.
What would it be like if a magician, a sort of Cartesian evil demon on
a modest scale, could change the world during the few milliseconds
your eyes were darting to their next destination? Amazingly, a computer
equipped with an automatic eye-tracker can detect and analyze the liftoff in the first few milliseconds of a saccade, calculate where ground
zero will be, and, before the saccade is over, erase the word on the
screen at ground zero and replace it with a different word of the same
length. What do you see? Just the new word, and with no sense at all
of anything having been changed. As you peruse the text on the screen,
it seems to you for all the world as stable as if the words were carved
in marble, but to another person reading the same text over your shoulder (and saccading to a different drummer) the screen is aquiver with
changes.
       The effect is overpowering. When I first encountered an eye-tracker experiment, and saw how oblivious subjects were (apparently)
 to the changes flickering on the screen, I asked if I could be a subject.
 I wanted to see for myself. I was seated at the apparatus, and my head
 was immobilized by having me bite on a "bite bar." This makes the
 job easier for the eye-tracker, which bounces an unnoticeable beam of
 light off the lens of the subject's eye, and analyzes the return to detect
 any motion of the eye. While I waited for the experimenters to turn on
 the apparatus, I read the text on the screen. I waited, and waited, eager
 for the trials to begin. I got impatient. "Why don't you turn it on?" I
 asked. "It is on," they replied.
       Since all the changes on the screen happen during saccades, your
 sentries don't get to issue any effective alarms. Until recently this phenomenon has been called "saccadic suppression." The idea was that
 the brain must somehow shut down the input from the eyes during
 saccades, since no one can notice changes that occur in the visual field

=== p. 362 ===

  during saccades, and, of course, no one complains of giddy and alarming changes. But a clever experiment with an eye-tracker (Brooks et al.,
  1980) has shown that if a stimulus — such as a word or alphabet letter — is moved in synchrony with the saccade, keeping pace with the
  "shadow" of the fovea as it races to its new landing spot, it is readily
 seen and identified by the subject. Input from the eye is not blocked
 on its way to the brain during saccades, but under normal conditions
 it is unusable — everything is just rushing by too fast to make sense
 of — so the brain treats it all with benign neglect. if all your sentries
 send their alarms at once, the best thing to do is just ignore them all.
       In the experimental situation I was in, words on the screen were
 being erased and replaced during my saccades. if your parafoveal vision
 can't discriminate the word at ground zero before you saccade to it,
 once you get there and identify it, there can't be any prior record or
 memory of it in your brain with which to compare it. The switch can't
 be noticed because the information logically required for such a noticing is simply not there. Of course it seems to you as you read this page
 that all the words on the line are in some sense present in your consciousness (in the background) even before you specifically attend to
them, but this is an illusion. They are only virtually present.
       There is some information about the surrounding words in your
brain, of course — enough to have served as the guide and instigator
of the most recent saccade, for instance. Just what information is already
there? Experiments with eye-trackers and similar apparatus can determine the limits of what you can notice, and thereby determine the
limits of what is present in your mind. (See, e.g., Pollatsek, Rayner,
and Collins, 1984; Morris, Rayner, and Pollatsek, 1990.) To insist, as
Otto was tempted to do, that what is not there in the brain must nevertheless be there in the mind because it certainly seems to be there is
pointless. For as we have just seen, it wouldn't be "there" in any sense
that could make a difference to Otto's own experiences, let alone to his
capacity to pass tests, press buttons, and so forth.

     8. SEEING IS BELIEVING: A DIALOGUE WITH OTTO

     At this time our critic Otto insists on a review, for he's sure he's
been hoodwinked somewhere along the line. I'm going to engage him
in a dialogue, hoping that he does justice to many if not all of your
doubts as well. Otto begins:

=== p. 363 ===

     It seems to me that you've denied the existence of the most indubitably real phenomena there are: the real seemings that even
     Descartes in his Meditations couldn't doubt.
In a sense, you're right; that's what Pm denying exist. LeVs return to
the neon color-spreading phenomenon. There seems to be a pinkish
glowing ring on the dust jacket.
     There sure does.
But there isn't any pinkish glowing ring. Not really.

     Right. But there sure seems to be!

Right.

     So where is     then?
Where's what?
     The pinkish glowing ring.
There      any; I thought you'd just acknowledged that.
     Well, yes, there     any pinkish ring out there on the page, but
     there sure seems to be.
Right. There seems to be a pinkish glowing ring.

     So leVs talk about that ring.

Which one?
     The one that seems to be.
There is no such thing as a pink ring that merely seems to be.
     Look, I don't just say that there seems to be a pinkish glowing
     ring; there really does seem to be a pinkish glowing ring!
I hasten to agree. I never would accuse you of speaking disingenuously!
You really mean it when you say there seems to be a pinkish glowing
ring.
     Look. I don't just mean it. I don't just think there seems to be a
     pinkish glowing ring; there really seems to be a pinkish glowing
     ring!

=== p. 364 ===

Now you've done it. You've fallen in a trap, along with a lot of others.
You seem to think there's a difference between thinking (judging, dc-ciding, being of the heartfelt opinion that) something seems pink to
you and something really seeming pink to you. But there is no difference. There is no such phenomenon as really seeming — over and above
the phenomenon of judging in one way or another that something is
the case.
     Recall the Marilyn wallpaper. The wall is, in fact, covered in high-resolution Marilyns. Moreover, that's just how it seems to you! It seems
to you that the wall is covered in high-resolution Marilyns. Lucky you,
your visual apparatus has led you to a true belief about a feature of
your environment. But there aren't lots of real seeming Marilyns represented in your brain — or your mind. There is no medium that reproduces the wallpaper detail, that renders it for your inner Witness.
All that is the case is that it seems to you that there are lots of high-resolution Marilyns there (and this time you're right — there really axe).
Other times, you may be wrong; it may seem to you — in the color phi
phenomenon — that a single spot moved right, changing color as it
went, when in fact there were simply two differently colored spots
flashing. Its seeming to you this way does not require rendering in the
brain, any more than the brain's color judgments, once reached, need
to be subsequently decoded somewhere.
      But then what is happening when it seems to me that there is a
      pinkish glowing ring? What is the positive account that your theory provides? You seem to me to be terribly evasive on this score.
I guess you're right. It's time to come clean and present the positive
account, but I confess I'll have to do it by starting with a caricature and
then revising it. I can't seem to discover a more direct way of expounding it.
      So I've noticed. Carry on.
Suppose there were a Central Meaner. But suppose that instead of sitting
in a Cartesian Theater watching the Presentation, the Central Meaner
sits in the dark and has presentiments — it just suddenly occurs to him
that there is something pink out there, the way it might suddenly occur
to you that there's somebody standing behind you.
      What are presentiments, exactly? What are they made of?
Good question, which I must answer evasively at first, in caricature.
These presentiments are propositions the Central Meaner exclaims to

=== p. 365 ===

               DISMANTUNG THE             PROTECTION PROGRAM      365

himself in his own special language, Mentalese. So his life consists of
a sequence of judgments, which are sentences of Mentalese, expressing
one proposition after another, at tremendous speed. Some of these he
decides to publish, in English translation.
      This theory has the virtue of getting rid of the figment, the projection into phenomenal space, the filling in of all the blanks on the
Theater Screen, but it still has a Central Meaner, and the Language of
Thought. So let's revise the theory. First, get rid of the Central Meaner
by distributing all his judgments around in time and space in the
brain — each act of discrimination or discernment or content-fixation
happens somewhere, but there is no one Discerner doing all the work.
And second, get rid of the Language of Thought; the content of the
judgments doesn't have to be expressible in "propositional" form —
that's a mistake, a case of misprojecting the categories of language back
onto the activities of the brain too enthusiastically.

     So presentiments are like speech acts except that there's no Actor
     and no Speech!

Well, yes. What there is, really, is just various events of content-fixation
occurring in various places at various times in the brain. These are
nobody's speech acts, and hence they don't have to be in a language,
but they are rather like speech acts; they have content, and they
do have the effect of informing various processes with this content.
We considered more detailed versions of this in chapters 5—10.
Some of these content-fixations have further effects, which eventually
lead to the utterance of sentences — in natural language — either
public or merely internal. And so a heterophenomenological text
gets created. When it's interpreted, the benign illusion is created of
there being an Author. This is sufficient to produce heterophenom-enology.

     But what about the actual phenomenology?

There is no such thing. Recall our discussion of the interpretation of
fiction. When we come across a novel that is loosely veiled autobiography, we find we can map the fictional events onto many of the real
events in the author's life, so in a strained sense the novel is about
those real events. The author may not realize this at all, but nevertheless, in this strained sense it is true; those events are what the text is
about, because those are the real events that explain why this text got
created.

=== p. 366 ===

     But what is the text about in the unstrained sense?
Nothing. It's fiction. It seems to be about various fictional characters,
places, and events, but these events never happened; it isn't really about
anything.
     But when I read a novel, these fictional events come alive! Something happens in me; I visualize the events. The act of reading,
     and interpreting, a text such as a novel creates some new things
     in my imagination: images of the characters doing the deeds. After
     all, when we go to see a film version of a novel we have read, we
     often think — "That's not at all the way I imagined her!"
Granted. In "Fearing Fictions," the philosopher Kendall Walton (1978)
claims that these acts of imagination on the part of an interpreter supplement the text in much the same way the pictures found in illustrated
          of novels do, "combining with the novel to form a 'larger'
 tictional,                           world" (p. 17). These additions are
perfectly real, but they are just more "text" — not made of figment, but
made of judgment. There is nothing more to phenomenology than that.
     But there seems to be!
Exactly! There seems to be phenomenology. That's a fact that the het-erophenomenologist enthusiastically concedes. But it does not follow
from this undeniable, universally attested fact that there really is phenomenology. This is the crux.
     Are you denying then that consciousness is a plenum?
Yes indeed. That's part of what I'm denying. Consciousness is gappy
and sparse, and doesn't contain half of what people think is there!
     But, but...
But consciousness sure seems to be a plenum?
     Yes!
I agree; it seems to be a plenum; it even seems to be a "striking fact"
about consciousness that it is continuous, as Edelman says, but...
     I know, I know: it doesn't follow from the fact that it seems to be
     a plenum that it is a plenum.
Now you've got it.
     But there's another problem I have with this hall of mirrors you
     call a theory. You say it is only as if there were a Central Meaner,

=== p. 367 ===

     as if there were a single Author, as if there were a place where it
     all comes together! I don't understand this as if business!
Perhaps another thought experiment will make this more palatable.
Imagine that we visited another planet and found that the scientists
there had a rather charming theory: Every physical thing has a soul
inside it, and every soul loves every other soul. This being so, things
tend to move toward each other, impelled by the love of their internal
souls for each other. We can suppose, moreover, that these scientists
had worked out quite accurate systems of soul-placement, so that, having determined the precise location in physical space of an item's soul,
they could answer questions about its stability ("It will fall over because
its soul is so high"), about vibration ("If you put a counterbalancing
object on the side of that drive wheel, with a rather large soul, it will
smooth out the wobble"), and about many much more technical topics.
      What we could tell them, of course, is that they have hit upon the
concept of a center of gravity (or more accurately, a center of mass),
and are just treating it a bit too ceremoniously. We tell them that they
can go right on talking and thinking the way they were — all they have
to give up is a bit of unnecessary metaphysical baggage. There is a
simpler, more austere (and much more satisfying) interpretation of the
very facts they use their soul-physics to understand. They ask us: Are
there souls? Well, sure, we reply — only they're abstracta, mathematical abstractions rather than nuggets of mysterious stuff. They're exquisitely useful fictions. It is as if every object attracted every other
object by concentrating all its gravitational oomph in a single point —
and it's vastly easier to calculate the behavior of systems using this
principled fiction than it would be to descend to the grubby details —
every point attracting every other point.

     I feel as if my pocket were just picked.

Well don't say I didn't warn you. You can't expect consciousness to
turn out to be just the way you wanted it. Besides, what are you really
giving up?
     Only my soul.
Not in any coherent, defensible sense. All you're giving up is a nugget
of specialness that couldn't really be special anyway. Why would you
think any more of yourself if you turned out to be a sort of mind-pearl
in the brain-oyster? What would be so special about being a mind-pearl?

=== p. 368 ===

     A mind-pearl might be immortal, unlike a brain.
      The idea that the Self — or the Soul — is really just an abstraction
strikes many people as simply a negative idea, a denial rather than
anything positive. But in fact it has a lot going for it, including — if it
matters to you — a somewhat more robustly conceived version of potential immortality than anything to be found in traditional ideas of a
soul, but that will have to wait until chapter 13. First we must deal
definitively with qualia, which still have a grip on our imaginations.

