=== chunk: dennett-1991-consciousness-explained/ch14-consciousness-imagined ===
title: Consciousness Imagined
source_pdf: docs/sources/dennett-1991-consciousness-explained/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 446-471
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 431
plan_page_end: 456
extracted_pages: 25 (plan nominally 26; trailing blank trimmed)
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 431 ===

                                            CONSCIOUSNESS
                                                        IMAGINED

     1.   IMAGINING A CONSCIOUS ROBOT

      The phenomena of human consciousness have been explained in
the preceding chapters in terms of the operations of a virtual machine,"
a sort of evolved (and evolving) computer program that shapes the
activities of the brain. There is no Cartesian Theater; there are just
Multiple Drafts composed by processes of content fixation playing various semi-independent roles in the brain's larger economy of controlling
a human body's Journey through life. The astonishingly persistent conviction that there is a Cartesian Theater is the result of a variety of
cognitive illusions that have now been exposed and explained.
"Qualia" have been replaced by complex dispositional states of the
brain, and the self (otherwise known as the Audience in the Cartesian
Theater, the Central Meaner, or the Witness) turns out to be a valuable
abstraction, a theorist's fiction rather than an internal observer or boss.
      if the self is "just" the Center of Narrative Gravity, and if all the
phenomena of human consciousness are explicable as "just" the activities of a virtual machine realized in the astronomically adjustable connections of a human brain, then, in principle, a suitably "programmed"
robot, with a silicon-based computer brain, would be conscious, would
have a self. More aptly, there would be a conscious self whose body
was the robot and whose brain was the computer. This implication of
my theory strikes some people as obvious and unobjectionable. "Of
course we're machines! We're just very, very complicated, evolved machines made of organic molecules instead of metal and silicon, and we

=== p. 432 ===

are conscious, so there can be conscious machines — us." For these
readers, this implication was a foregone conclusion. What has proved
to be interesting to them, I hope, are the variety of unobvious implications encountered along the way, in particular those that show how
much of the commonsense Cartesian picture must be replaced as we
learn more about the actual machinery of the brain.
      Other people, however, find the implication that there could be,
in principle, a conscious robot so incredible that it amounts in their
eyes to the reductio ad absurdum of my theory. A friend of mine once
responded to my theory with the following heartfelt admission: "But,
Dan, I just can't imagine a conscious robot!" Some readers may be
inclined to endorse his claim. They should resist the inclination, for
he misspoke. His error was simple, but it draws attention to a fundamental confusion blocking progress on understanding consciousness.
"You know that's false," I replied. "You've often imagined conscious
robots. It's not that you can't imagine a conscious robot; it's that you
can't imagine how a robot could be conscious."
      Anyone who has seen R2D2 and C3PO in Star Wars, or listened
to Hal in 2001, has imagined a conscious robot (or a conscious computer — whether the system is up-and-about, like R2D2, or bedridden,
like Hal, is not really that crucial to the task of imagination). It is literally
child's play to imagine the stream of consciousness of an "inanimate"
thing. Children do it all the time. Not only do teddy bears have inner
lives, but so does the Little Engine That Could. Balsam trees stand
silently in the woods, fearing the woodsman's ax but at the same time
yearning to become a Christmas tree in some nice warm house, surrounded by happy children. Children's literature (to say nothing of
television) is chock full of opportunities to imagine the conscious lives
of such mere things. The artists who illustrate these fantasies usually
help the children's imagination by drawing expressive faces on these
phony agents, but it's not essential. Speaking—as Hal does—will
serve about as well, in the absence of an expressive face, to secure the
illusion that there is someone in there, that it is like something to be
Hal, or a teddy bear, or a choo-choo train.
      That's the rub, of course; These are all illusions — or so it seems.
There are differences among them. It's obvious that no teddy bear is
conscious, but it's really not obvious that no robot could be. What is
obvious is just that it's hard to imagine how they could be. Since my
friend found it hard to imagine how a robot could be conscious, he was
reluctant to imagine a robot to be conscious — though he could easily
have done so. There is all the difference in the world between these

=== p. 433 ===

two feats of imagination, but people tend to confuse them. It is indeed
mind-bogglingly difficult to imagine how the computer-brain of a robot
could support consciousness. How could a complicated slew of information-processing events in a bunch of silicon chips amount to conscious experiences? But it's just as difficult to imagine how an organic
human brain could support consciousness. How could a complicated
slew of electrochemical interactions between billions of neurons
amount to conscious experiences? And yet we readily imagine human
beings to be conscious, even if we still can't imagine how this could
be.
      How could the brain be the seat of consciousness? This has usually
been treated as a rhetorical question by philosophers, suggesting that
an answer to it would be quite beyond human comprehension. A primary goal of this book has been to demolish that presumption. I have
argued that you can imagine how all that complicated slew of activity
in the brain amounts to conscious experience. My argument is straightforward: I have shown you how to do it. It turns out that the way to
imagine this is to think of the brain as a computer of sorts. The concepts
of computer science provide the crutches of imagination we need if we
are to stumble across the terra incognita between our phenomenology
as we know it by "introspection" and our brains as science reveals
them to us. By thinking of our brains as information-processing systems,
we can gradually dispel the fog and pick our way across the great divide,
discovering how it might be that our brains produce all the phenomena.
There are many treacherous pitfalls to avoid — such inviting dead ends
as the Central Meaner, "filling in," and "qualia," for instance — and
no doubt there are still some residual confusions and outright errors
in the sketch I have provided, but at least we can now see what a path
would be like.
      Some philosophers have declared, however, that crossing this divide is strictly impossible. Thomas Nagel (1974, 1986) has claimed that
there is no getting to the subjective level of phenomenology from the
objective level of physiology. More recently Cohn McGinn has claimed
that consciousness has a "hidden structure" that lies beyond both phenomenology and physiology, and while this hidden structure could
bridge the gap, it is probably forever inaccessible to us.

      The kind of hidden structure I envisage would lie at neither of
      the levels suggested by Nagel: it would be situated somewhere
      between them. Neither phenomenological nor physical, this mediating level would not (by definition) be fashioned on the model

=== p. 434 ===

     of either side of the divide, and hence would not find itself unable
     to reach out to the other side. Its characterization would call for
     radical conceptual innovation (which I have argued is probably
     beyond us). [McGinn, 1991, pp. 102—103]

       The "software' or "virtual machine" level of description I have
exploited in this book is exactly the sort of mediating level McGinn
describes: not explicitly physiological or mechanical and yet capable
of providing the necessary bridges to the brain machinery on the one
hand, while on the other hand not being explicitly phenomenological
and yet capable of providing the necessary bridges to the world of
content, the worlds of (hetero-)phenomenology. We've done it! We have
imagined how a brain could produce conscious experience. Why does
McGinn think it is beyond us to engage in this "radical conceptual
innovation"? Does he subject the various software approaches to the
mind to a rigorous and detailed analysis that demonstrates their futility?
No. He doesn't examine them at all. He doesn't even try to imagine the
intermediate level he posits; he just notes that it seems obvious to him
that there is nothing to hope for from this quarter.
       This spurious "obviousness" is a great obstacle to progress in
understanding consciousness. It is the most natural thing in the world
to think of consciousness as occurring in some sort of Cartesian Theater,
and to suppose that there is nothing really wrong with thinking this
way. This seems obvious until you look quite hard at what we might
learn about the brain's activities, and begin trying to imagine, in detail,
an alternative model. Then what happens is rather like the effect of
learning how a stage magician performs a conjuring trick. Once we take
a serious look backstage, we discover that we didn't actually see what
we thought we saw onstage. The huge gap between phenomenology
and physiology shrinks a bit; we see that some of the "obvious" features
of phenomenology are not real at all: There is no filling in with figment;
there are no intrinsic qualia; there is no central fount of meaning and
action; there is no magic place where the understanding happens. In
fact, there is no Cartesian Theater; the very distinction between onstage
experiences and backstage processes loses its appeal. We still have
plenty of amazing phenomena to explain, but a few of the most mind-boggling special effects just don't exist at all, and hence require no
explanation.
       Once we make some progress on the difficult task, imagining how
a brain produces the phenomena of consciousness, we get to make some
slight adjustments in the easy task: imagining someone or something

=== p. 435 ===

to be conscious. We may continue to think of this by positing a stream
of consciousness of sorts, but we no longer endow that stream with all
of its traditional properties. Now that the stream of consciousness has
been reconceived as the operations of a virtual machine realized in the
brain, it is no longer "obvious" that we are succumbing to an illusion
when we imagine such a stream occurring in the computer brain of a
robot, for instance.
      McGinn invites his readers to join him in surrender: It's just impossible to imagine how software could make a robot conscious. Don't
even try, he says. Other philosophers have fostered this attitude by
devising thought experiments that "work" precisely because they dissuade the reader from trying to imagine, in detail, how software could
accomplish this. Curiously, the two best known both involve allusions
to China: Ned Block's (1978) Chinese Nation and John Searle's (1980,
1982, 1984, 1988) Chinese Room.1 Both thought experiments rely on
the same misdirection of imagination, and since Searle's has been the
more widely discussed, I will concentrate on it. Searle invites us to
imagine him locked in a room, hand-simulating a giant Al program,
which putatively understands Chinese. He stipulates that the program
passes the Turing test, foiling all attempts by human interlocutors to
distinguish it from a genuine understander of Chinese. It does not follow, he says, from this merely behavioral indistinguishability that there
is any genuine understanding of Chinese, or any Chinese consciousness,
in the Chinese Room. Searle, locked in the room and busily manipulating the symbol strings of the program according to the program,
doesn't thereby gain any understanding of Chinese, and there is nothing
else in the room that understands Chinese either (this is "just obvious,"
as Frank Jackson would say).
      This thought experiment is supposed to prove the impossibility
of what Searle calls "strong Al," the thesis that "the appropriately
programmed digital computer with the right inputs and outputs would
thereby have a mind in exactly the sense that human beings have
minds" (Searle, 1966a). There has been a huge outpouring of reaction
to Searle's many versions of this thought experiment over the last dec-

       1. Try to imagine the state of mind of Ji Mu-Mm, my graduate student from Beijing,
whose introduction to Anglo-American philosophy of mind (while his English was still
quite rudimentary) was sitting in a seminar where students and professors vigorously
debated what would be the case if the entire population of China were somehow forced
to participate in a massive realization of a putatively conscious Al program (Block's
example) and then went on to discuss, with equal obliviousness to the sensitivities of a
Chinese observer, Searle's Chinese Room.

=== p. 436 ===

ade, and while philosophers and others have always found flaws in his
thought experiment when it is considered as a logical argument,2 it is
undeniable that its "conclusion' continues to seem "obvious" to many
people. Why? Because people don't actually imagine the case in the
detail that it requires.
      Here is an informal experiment that will help us see if my diagnosis is correct. First, let's imagine a brief excerpt from the Chinese
Room's winning dialogue with the judge in the Turing test. (For con-venieiice, I've translated it from Chinese to English.)
       JUDGE: Did you hear about the Irishman who found a magic lamp?
       When he rubbed it a genie appeared and granted him three wishes.
       "I'll have a pint of Guixmess!" the Irishman replied, and immediately it appeared. The Irishman eagerly set to sipping and then
       gulping, but the level of Guinness in the glass was always magically restored. After a while the genie became impatient. "Well,
       what about your second wish?" he asked. Replied the Irishman
       between gulps, "Oh well, I guess I'll have another one of these!"
             CHINESE ROOM: Very funny. No, I hadn't heard it — but you
       know, I find ethnic jokes in bad taste. I laughed in spite of myself,
       but really, I think you should find other topics for us to discuss.
             J: Fair enough, but I told you the joke because I want you to
      explain it to me.
             CR: Boring! You should never explain jokes.
             J: Nevertheless, this is my test question. Can you explain to
      me how and why the joke "works"?
             CR: If you insist. You see, it depends on the assumption that
      the magically refilling glass will go on refilling forever, so the
      Irishman has all the stout he can ever drink. So he hardly has a
      reason for wanting a duplicate, but he is so stupid (that's the part
      I object to) or so besotted by the alcohol, that he doesn't recognize
      this, and so, unthinkingly endorsing his delight with his first wish
      come true, he asks for seconds. These background assumptions
      aren't true, of course, but just part of the ambient lore of joke-

       2. The definitive refutation, still never adequately responded to by Searle, is Doug-las Hofstadter's. in Hofstadter and Dennett (1981). pp. 373—382. There have been many
other incisive criticisms over the years. tn 'Fast Thinking (in Dennett, 1987a), I offered
a new diagnosis of the sources of confusion in his thought experiment. His response was
to declare, with no supporting argument, that all its points are irrelevant (Searle. 1988b).
No conjuror enjoys having his tricks exp'ained to the public,

=== p. 437 ===

     telling, in which we suspend our disbelief in magic, and so forth.
     By the way, we could imagine a somewhat labored continuation
     in which the Irishman turned out to be "right" in his second wish
     after all — perhaps he's planning to throw a big party, and one
     glass won't refill fast enough to satisfy all his thirsty guests (and
     it's no use saving it up in advance — we all know how stale stout
     loses its taste). We tend not to think of such complications, which
     is part of the explanation of why jokes work. Is that enough?

      This conversation is not dazzling, but let's suppose it was good
enough to fool the judge. Now we are invited to imagine all these
speeches by CR being composed by the giant program Searle is diligently hand-simulating. I-lard to imagine? Of course, but since Searle
stipulates that the program passes the Turing test, and since this level
of conversational sophistication would surely be within its powers,
unless we try to imagine the complexities of a program capable of
generating this sort of conversation, we are not following directions.
Of course we should also imagine that Searle hasn't any inkling of what
he is doing in the Chinese Room; he just sees zeros and ones that he
manipulates according to the progTam. It is important, by the way, that
Searle invites us to imagine that he manipulates inscrutable Chinese
characters instead of zeros and ones, for this may lull us into the (unwarranted) supposition that the giant program would work by somehow
simply "matching up" the input Chinese characters with some output
Chinese characters. No such program would work, of course — do CR's
speeches in English "match up" with the judge's questions?
       A program that could actually generate CR's speeches in response
to J's questions might look something like this in action (viewed from
the virtual-machine level, not from Searle's                   level). On
parsing the first words, "Did you hear about       some of the program's
joke-detecting demons were activated, which called up a host of strategies for dealing with fiction, "second intention" language, and the
like, so when the words "magic lamp" came to be parsed, the program
had already put a low priority on responses complaining that there
were no such things as magic lamps. A variety of standard genie-joke
narrative frames (Minsky, 1975) or scripts (Schank and Abelson, 1977)
were activated, creating various expectations for continuations, but
 these were short-circuited, in effect, by the punch line, which invoked
 a more mundane script (the script for "asking for seconds"), and the
 unexpectedness of this was not lost on the program.. At the same
                                                           .

=== p. 438 ===

 time, demons sensitive to the negative connotations of ethnic-joketelling were also alerted, eventually leading to the second theme of CR's
 first response. . And so forth, in vastly more detail than I have tried
                  .

 to sketch here.
        That fact is that any program that could actually hold up its end
 in the conversation depicted would have to be an extraordinarily supple, sophisticated, and multilayered system, brimming with "world
 knowledge" and meta-knowledge and meta-meta-knowledge about its
 own responses, the likely responses of its interlocutor, its own "motivations" and the motivations of its interlocutor, and much, much
 more. Searle does not deny that programs can have all this structure,
 of course. He simply discourages us from attending to it. But if we are
 to do a good job imagining the case, we are not only entitled but obliged
 to imagine that the program Searle is hand-simulating has all this structure — and more, if only we can imagine it. But then it is no longer
 obvious, I trust, that there is no genuine understanding of the joke going
 on. Maybe the billions of actions of all those highly structured parts
 produce genuine understanding in the system after all. if your response
 to this hypothesis is that you haven't the faintest idea whether there
 would be genuine understanding in such a complex system, that is
 already enough to show that Searles thought experiment depends, illicitly, on your imagining too simple a case, an irrelevant case, and
 drawing the "obvious" conclusion from it.
        Here is how the misdirection occurs. We see clearly enough that
 if there were understanding in such a giant system, it would not be
Searle's understanding (since he is just a cog in the machinery, oblivious to the context of what he is doing). We also see clearly that there
 is nothing remotely like genuine understanding in any hunk of programming small enough to imagine readily — whatever it is, it's just a
mindless routine for transforming symbol strings into other symbol
strings according to some mechanical or syntactical recipe. Then comes
the suppressed premise: Surely more of the same, no matter how much
more, would never add up to genuine understanding. But why should
anyone think this was true? Cartesian dualists would think so, because
they think that even human brains are unable to accomplish understanding all by themselves; according to the Cartesian view, it takes an
immaterial soul to pull off the miracle of understanding. If, on the other
hand, we are materialists who are convinced that one way or another
our brains are responsible on their own, without miraculous assistance,
for our understanding, we must admit that genuine understanding is
somehow achieved by a process composed of interactions between a

=== p. 439 ===

host of subsystems none of which understand a thing by themselves.
The argument that begins this little bit of brain activity doesn't understand Chinese, and neither does this bigger bit of which it is a
part       is headed for the unwanted conclusion that even the activity
of the whole brain is insufficient to account for understanding Chinese.
It is hard to imagine how "just more of the same" could add up to
understanding, but we have very good reason to believe that it does,
so in this case, we should try harder, not give up.
      How might we try harder? With the help of some handy concepts:
the intermediate-level software concepts that were designed by computer scientists precisely to help us keep track of otherwise unimaginable complexities in large systems. At the intermediate levels we see
many entities that are quite invisible at more microscopic levels, such
as the "demons" alluded to above, to which a modicum of quasi-understanding is attributed. Then it becomes not so difficult to imagine
how "more of the same" could amount to genuine understanding. All
these demons and other entities are organized into a huge system, the
activities of which organize themselves around its own Center of Narrative Gravity. Searle, laboring in the Chinese Room, does not understand Chinese, but he is not alone in the room. There is also the System,
CR, and it is to that self that we should attribute any understanding of
the joke.
      This reply to Searle's example is what he calls the Systems Reply.
It has been the standard reply of people in Al from the earliest outings
of his thought experiment, more than a decade ago, but it is seldom
appreciated by people outside of Al. Why not? Probably because they
haven't learned how to imagine such a system. They just can't imagine
how understanding could be a property that emerges from lots of distributed quasi-understanding in a large system. They certainly can't if
they don't try, but how could they be helped along on this difficult
exercise? Is it "cheating" to think of the software as composed of homunculi who quasi-understand, or is that just the right crutch to help
the imagination make sense of astronomical complexity? Searle begs
the question. He invites us to imagine that the giant program consists
of some simple table-lookup architecture that directly matches Chinese
character strings to others, as if such a program could stand in, fairly,
for any program at all. We have no business imagining such a simple
program and assuming that it is the program Searle is simulating, since
no such program could produce the sorts of results that would pass the
Turing test, as advertised. (For a similar move and its rebuttal, see Block,
1982; and Dennett, 1985).

=== p. 440 ===

       Complexity does matter. if it didn't, there would be a much shorter
 argument against strong Al: "Hey, look at this hand calculator. It doesn't
 understand Chinese, and any conceivable computer is just a giant hand
 calculator, so no computer could understand Chinese. Q.E.D." When
 we factor in the complexity, as we must, we really have to factor it
 in — and not just pretend to factor it in. That is hard to do, but until
 we do, any intuitions we have about what is "obviously" not present
 are not to be trusted. Like Frank Jackson's case of Mary the color scientist, Searle's thought experiment yields a strong, clear conviction
only when we fail to follow instructions. These intuition pumps are
defective; they do not enhance but mislead our imaginations.
       But what, then, of my own intuition pumps? What of Shakey the
robot, or the CADBLIND Mark II, or the biofeedback-trained blindsight
patient, for instance? Are they not equally suspect, equally guilty of
misleading the reader? I've certainly done my best in telling these tales
to lead your imagination down certain paths, and to keep you from
bogging down in complexities I deemed unnecessary to the point I was
attempting to make. There is some asymmetry, however: My intuition
pumps are, for the most part, intended to help you imagine new possibilities, not convince you that certain prospects are impossible. There
are exceptions. My variation on the brain in the vat that opened the
book was designed to impress on you the impossibility of certain sorts
of deception, and some of the thought experiments in chapter 5 were
intended to show that, unless there were a Cartesian Theater, there
could not be a fact of the matter distinguishing Orwellian from Stalin-esque content revisions. These thought experiments proceeded, however, by heightening the vividness for the "opposition"; the examples
of the woman in the hat at the party and the long-haired woman with
glasses, for instance, were designed to sharpen the very intuition I then
sought to discredit by argument.
      Still, let the reader beware: My intuition pumps, like anyone else's,
are not the straightforward demonstrations they may seem to be; they
are more art than science. (For further warnings about philosophers'
thought experiments, see Wilkes, 1988.) If they help us conceive of new
possibilities, which we can then confirm by more systematic methods,
that is an achievement; if they lure us down the primrose path, that is
a pity. Even good tools can be misused, and like any other workers, we
will do better if we understand how our tools work.

=== p. 441 ===

     2. WHAT IT IS LIKE TO BE A BAT

     The most widely cited and influential thought experiment about
consciousness is Thomas Nagel's "What 15 It Like to Be a Bat?" (1974).
He answers his title question by claiming that this is impossible for us
to imagine. This claim is congenial to many, apparently; one sometimes
sees his paper cited by scientists as if it were that rarity of rarities, a
philosophical "result" — a received demonstration of a fact that any
theory must subsequently accommodate.
       Nagel chose his target creatures well. Bats, as fellow mammals,
are enough like us to support the conviction that of course they are
conscious. (If he had written "What Is It Like to Be a Spider?" many
would be inclined to wonder what made him so sure it was like anything at all.) But thanks to their system of echolocation — bats can "see
with their ears" — they are also different enough from us so that
we can sense the vast gulf. Had he written a paper called "What Is It
Like to Be a Chimpanzee?" or, more to the point, "What Is It Like to
Be a Cat?" the opinion that his pessimistic conclusion was obvious
would not be so close to unanimity. There are many people who are
supremely confident that they know Just what it's like to be a cat. (They
are wrongs of course, unless they have supplemented all their loving
and empathetic observation with vast amounts of physiological research, but they would be erring on the wrong side, from Nagel's point
 of view.)
        For better or worse, most people seem quite cheerful about accepting Nagel's "result" regarding the inaccessibility to us of bat consciousness. Some philosophers have challenged it,                   and for
 good   reason               1981; Hardin, 1988; Leiber,  1988; Akins, 1990).
 First we must be clear about Just which result it is. It is not just the
 epistemological or evidential claim that even if someone succeeded
 ("by accidents') in imagining what it is like to be a bate we would never
 be able to confirm that this successful feat of imagination had occurred.
 It is rather that we human beings don't have and could never acquire
 the wherewithal, the representational                   to represent to ourselves what it is like to be a bat.
        The distinction is important. In chapter 12 we looked at the similar
 feat of imagining what it must have been like to be a Leipziger hearing
 one of Bach's cantatas for the first time. The epistemological problem
  is difficult, but straightforwardly addressable by the usual sorts of research. Figuring out Just what sorts of experiences they would have
  had, and how these would differ from our experiences of Bach, is a

=== p. 442 ===

 matter of historical, cultural, psychological, and, maybe, physiological
 investigation. We can figure out some of this quite readily, including
 some of the most striking differences from our own experience, but if
 we were to try to put ourselves into the very sequence of experiential
 states such a person would enjoy, we would face diminishing returns.
 The task would require us to subject ourselves to vast transformations — forgetting much of what we know, losing associations and
 habits, acquiring new habits and associations. We can use our "thirdperson" research to say what these transformations would be, but actually undergoing them would involve terrible costs of isolation from
our contemporary culture — no listening to the radio, no reading about
 post-Bach political and social developments, and so forth. There is no
need to go to those lengths to learn about Leipziger consciousness.
       The same is true about imagining what it is like to be a bat. We
should be interested in what we can know about the bat's consciousness
(if any), not whether we can turn our minds temporarily or permanently
into bat minds. In chapter 12, we undermined the presumption that
there were "intrinsic" properties — qualia — that constitute what it is
like to have one conscious experience or another, and as Akins (1990)
points out, even if there were residual nondispositional, nonrelatjonal
properties of bat experiences, becoming intimately acquainted with
them, while remaining ignorant of the researchable facts about the systematic structure of bat perception and behavior, would leave us ignorant of what it is like to be a bat. There is at least a lot that we can
know about what it is like to be a bat, and neither Nagel nor anyone
else has given us a good reason to believe there is anything interesting
or theoretically important that is inaccessible to us.
      Nagel claims that no amount of third-person knowledge could tell
us what it is like to be a bat, and I flatly deny that claim. How might
we resolve this dispute? By engaging in something that starts out as
child's play — a game in which one person imagines what it is like to
be x, and the other then tries to demonstrate that there is something
wrong with that particular exercise of heterophenomenology.
     Here are some simple warmup exercises:

     A: Here's Pooh the teddy bear, thinking how nice it would be to
     have some honey for breakfast!
           B: Wrong. The teddy bear has no provision for distinguishing
     honey from anything else. No operating sense organs, and not even
     a stomach. The teddy bear is filled with inert stuffing. It is not
     like anything to be a teddy bear.

=== p. 443 ===

           A. Here's Bambi the deer, admiring the beautiful sunset, until
     the bright orange sky suddenly reminds him of the evil hunter's
     jacket'
           B. Wrong. Deer are colorblind (well, they may have some
     sort of dichrornatic vision). Whatever deer are conscious of (if
     anything), they don't distinguish colors such as orange.
           A. Here's Billy the bat perceiving, in his special sonar sort
     of way, that the flying thing swooping down toward him was not
     his cousin Bob, but an eagle, with pinfeathers spread and talons
     poised for the kill!
           B. Hang on — how far away did you say the eagle was? A
     bat's echolocation is only good for a few meters.
           A. Urn, well. .  And the eagle was already only two meters
                             .

     away!
           B. Ah, now this is harder to say. Just what are the resolution
     limits of a bat's echolocation? Is it used to identify objects at all,
     or just as an alerter and tracker for capture? Would a bat be able
     to distinguish pinleathers spread horn pinleathers closed just
     using echolocation? I doubt it, but we will have to design sorne
     experiments to see, and also, of course, some experiments to discover whether bats are capable of keeping track of, and reidenti-fying, their kin. Some mammals can, and others, we have good
     reason to believe, are utterly oblivious of such matters.

     The sorts of investigation suggested by this exercise would take
us a long way into an account of the structure of the bat's perceptual
and behavioral world, so we could rank order heterophenomenological
narratives for realisrn, discarding those that asserted or presupposed
discrirninatory talents, or reactive dispositions, demonstrably not provided for in the ecology and neurophysiology of the bat. For example,
we would learn that bats would not be bothered by the loud squeaks
they ernit in order to produce their echoes, because they have a cleverly
designed muscle that shuts down their ears in perfect timing with their
squeaks, not unlike the timing devices that permit sensitive radar systems to avoid being blasted by their own outgoing signals. A lot of
research has already been done on these issues, so we can already say
much more, for instance about why bats use different frequency patterns
for their squeaks, depending on whether they are scanning for prey,
approaching a target, or horning in for the kill (Akins, 1989, 1990).
      When we arrive at heterophenomenological narratives that no
critic can find any positive grounds for rejecting, we should accept

=== p. 444 ===

them — tentatively, pending further discoveries — as accurate accounts of what it is like to be the creature in question. That, after all,
is how we treat each other. In recommending that we treat bats and
other candidates for interpretation the same way, I am not shifting the
burden of proof but extending the normal, human, burden of proof to
 other entities.
       We could use these investigations to dispel all sorts of overly
 romantic illusions about bat consciousness. We know that Randall Jar-rell's delightful children's book, The Bat-Poet (1963), is fantasy, because
we know that bats don't talk! Less obviously fantastical claims about
their phenomenology succumb to less obvious, but still public, facts
about their physiology and behavior. These investigations would show
us a great deal about what a bat could and could not be conscious of
under various conditions, by showing us what provisions there were
 in their nervous systems for representing this and that, and by checking
experimentally to make sure the bat actually put the information to use
in the modulation of its behavior. It is hard to imagine how much can
be gleaned from this sort of research until you actually look into it.
(For a surprisingly detailed preliminary investigation of what it is like
to be a vervet monkey, for instance, see Cheney and Seyfarth, How
Monkeys See the World, 1990.)
       This invites an obvious objection: These investigations would
show us a great deal about brain organization and information-processing in the bat, but they would show us only what bats are
not conscious of, leaving entirely open what, if anything, bats are conscious of. As we know, much of the information-processing in
nervous systems is entirely unconscious, so these methods of investigation will do nothing to rule out the hypothesis that bats are. flying

zombies, creatures it is not like anything to be! (Wilkes, 1988, p. 224,
wonders whether bat echolocation is a sort of blindsight, not like anything at all.)
      Ah, the bat is out of the bag. This is indeed the ominous direction
in which this discussion seems to be sliding, and we must head it off.
Richard Dawkins (1986), in an illuminating discussion of the design of
echolocation in horseshoe bats, gives us a clear version of the image
that is lurking.

     The Doppler Effect is used in police radar speed-traps for motorists. .. By comparing the outgoing frequency with the frequency
            .

     of the returning echo the police, or rather their automatic instrument [my emphasisi, can calculate the speed of each car. .. By       .

=== p. 445 ===

                                       CONSOOUSNESS IMAGINED        445

     comparing the pitch of its cry with the pitch of the returning echo,
     therefore, the bat (or rather its on-board computer in the brain)
      my emphasis] could, in theory, calculate how fast it was moving
     towards the tree. [pp. 30—311

It is tempting to ask: Is there something in the bat that is situated relative
to its "onboard computer" (which operates without a smidgen of consciousness) as the police are situated relative to their "automatic device"? The police don't have to calculate the Doppler shift consciously,
but they do have to experience, consciously, the readout on their device
that says, in bright red LED symbols: "75MPH." That is their cue for
leaping on their motorcycles and starting up their sirens. We may plausibly suppose that the bat also does not consciously calculate the Dop-pler shift — its onboard computer takes care of that — but then isn't
there a role left over, in the bat, for something like the experiencing
cop, a witness to appreciate (consciously) the "output" of the bat's
Doppler-effect-analysis computer? Note that we could easily enough
replace the police officers with an automatic device that somehow recorded the registration number of the offending vehicle, looked up the
operator's name and address and sent him or her a ticket. There is
nothing special about the task the police are doing that shows it could
not be done without any experiencing of anything. The same holds, it
would seem, for the bat. A bat might be a zombie. It would be a zombie — so this line of reasoning suggests — unless there were an inner
observer in it that reacts to an inner presentation in much the way the
officers react to the flashing red lights on their instruments.
      Don't fall in the trap. This is our old nemesis, the Audience in
the Cartesian Theater. Your consciousness does not consist in the fact
that your brain is inhabited by an inner agent to whom your brain
presents displays, so our inability to find such a central agent in the
bat's brain would not jeopardize its claim to consciousness, or our claim
to be able to say what its consciousness was like. In order to understand
a bat's consciousness, we must simply apply the same principles to the
bat that we apply to ourselves.
      But what could a bat do, then, that would be special enough to
 convince us that we were in the presence of genuine consciousness? It
 may seem that no matter what fancy output-users we situate behind
 the bat's Doppler-transducer, there could be no convincing, from-theoutside, "third-person" reason to grant the bat conscious experience.
 Not so. If the bat could talk, for instance, it would generate a text from
 which we could generate a heterophenomenological world, and that

=== p. 446 ===

 would give us exactly the same grounds for granting it consciousness
 that serve for any person. But, as we just noted, bats can't talk. They
can, however, behave in many nonverbal ways that can provide a clear
basis for describing their heterophenomenological world, or, as the
pioneer researcher von Uexküll (1909) called it, their Umwelt und In-nenwelt, their Surroundworld and Innerworld.
       Heterophenomenology without a text is not impossible, just difficult (Dennett, 1988a, 1988b, 1989a, 1989b). One branch of animal
heterophenomenology is known as cognitive ethology, the attempt to
model animals minds by studying — and experimenting on — their
behavior in the field. The possibilities and difficulties of this sort of
investigation are well represented in Cheney and Seyfarth (1990), Whiten and Byrne (1988), and in Ristau (1991), a festschrift dedicated to
Donald Griffin, the pioneer investigator of bat echolocation and the
creator of the field of cognitive ethology. One of the frustrating difficulties encountered by these investigators is that many of the experiments one dreams of running turn out to be utterly impractical in the
absence of language; one simply cannot set up subjects (and know that
one has set them up) in the ways these experiments would require
without conversing with the subjects (Dennett, 1988a).
      This is not just an epistemological problem for the heterophe-nomenologist; the very difficulty of creating the requisite experimental
circumstances in the natural environment demonstrates something
more fundamental about the minds of languageless creatures. It shows
that the ecological situations of these animals have never provided them
with opportunities for the development (by evolution, by learning, or
by both) of many of the advanced mental activities that shape our minds,
and so we can be quite sure they have never developed them. For
instance, consider the concept of a secret. A secret is not just something
you know that others don't know. For you to have a secret you need
to know that the others           know it, and you have to be able to control
that fact. (If you are the first to see the approaching stampede, you may
know something the others don't know, but not for long; you can't keep
this bit of privileged information secret.) The behavioral ecology of a
species has to be rather specially structured for there to be any role for
secrets at all. Antelopes, in their herds, have no Secrets and no way of
getting any. So an antelope is probably no more capable of hatching a
secret plan than it is capable of counting to a hundred or enjoying the
colors of a sunset. Bats, who engage in relatively solitary forays during
which they might be able to recognize that very isolation from their
rivals, meet one of the necessary conditions for having secrets. Do they

=== p. 447 ===

also have interests that might be noticeably well served by exploiting
secrets? (What could a clam do with a secret? Just sit there in the mud,
chuckling to itself?) Do bats also have habits of stealth or deception in
hunting that might be adapted for more elaborate secret-keeping activity? There are in fact many questions of this sort that, once raised,
suggest further investigations and experiments. The structure of a bat's
mind is just as accessible as the structure of a bat's digestive system;
the way to investigate either one is to go back and forth systematically
between an assay of its contents and an assay of the world from which
its contents were derived, paying attention to the methods and goals
of the derivation.
      Wittgenstein once said, "If a lion could talk, we could not understand him" (1958, p. 223). I think, on the contrary, that if a lion
could talk, that lion would have a mind so different from the general
run of lion minds, that although we could understand him just fine,
we would learn little about ordinary lions from him. Language, as we
saw in earlier chapters, plays an enormous role in the structuring of a
human mind, and the mind of a creature lacking language — and having
really no need for language — should not be supposed to be structured
in these ways. Does this mean that languageless animals "are not conscious at all" (as Descartes insisted)? This question always arises at this
moment as a sort of incredulous challenge, but we shouldn't feel obliged
to answer it as it stands. Notice that it presupposes something we have
worked hard to escape: the assumption that consciousness is a special
all-or-nothing property that sunders the universe into two vastly different categories: the things that have it (the things that it is like something to be, as Nagel would put it) and the things that lack it. Even in
our own case, we cannot draw the line separating our conscious mental
states from our unconscious mental states. The theory of consciousness
we have sketched allows for many variations of functional architecture,
and while the presence of language marks a particularly dramatic increase in imaginative range, versatility, and self-control (to mention a
few of the more obvious powers of the Joycean virtual machine), these
powers do not have the further power of turning on some special inner
light that would otherwise be off.
      When we imagine what it is like to be a languageless creature, we
start, naturally, from our own experience, and most of what then springs
to mind has to be adjusted (mainly downward). The sort of consciousness such animals enjoy is dramatically truncated, compared to ours.
A bat, for instance, not only can't wonder whether it's Friday; it can't
even wonder whether it's a bat; there is no role for wondering to play

=== p. 448 ===

in its cognitive structure. While a bat, like even the lowly lobster, has
a biological self, it has no selfy sell to speak of — no Center of Narrative
Gravity, or at most a negligible one. No words-on-the-tip-of-its-tongue,
but also no regrets, no complex yearnings, no nostalgic reminiscences,
no grand schemes, no reflections on what it is like to be a cat, or even
on what it is like to be a bat. This list of dismissals would be cheap
skepticism if we didn't have a positive empirical theory on which to
base it. Am I claiming to have proven that bats could not have these
mental states? Well, no, but I also can't prove that mushrooms could
not be intergalactic spaceships spying on us.
      Isn't this an awfully anthropocentric prejudice? Besides, what
about deaf-mutes? Aren't they conscious? Of course they are — but let's
not jump to extravagant conclusions about their consciousness, out of
misguided sympathy. When a deaf-mute acquires language (in partic-Sign language, the most natural language a deaf-mute can learn),
  full-fledged human mind is born, clearly different in discoverable
ways from the mind of a hearing person, but capable of all the reflective
intricacy and generative power — perhaps more. But without a natural
language, a deaf-mute's mind is terribly stunted. (See Sacks, 1989, especially the annotated bibliography.) As the philosopher Ian Hacking
(1990) notes in a review of Sacks's book, "It takes a vivid imagination
even to have a sense of what a deaf child is missing." One does not do
deaf-mutes a favor by imagining that in the absence of language they
enjoy all the mental delights we hearing human beings enjoy, and one
does not do a favor to nonhuman animals by trying to obscure the
available facts about the limitations of their minds.
       And this, as many of you are aching to point out, is a subtext that
has been struggling to get to the surface for quite a while: Many people
are afraid to see consciousness explained because they fear that if we
succeed in explaining it, we will lose our moral bearings. Maybe we
can imagine a conscious computer (or the consciousness of a bat) but
we shouldn't try, they think. If we get into that bad habit, we will start
treating animals as if they were wind-up toys, babies and deaf-mutes
as if they were teddy bears, and — just to add insult to injury — robots
as if they were real people.

     3. MINDING AND MAUERING

     I take the title of this section from an article by Marian Stamp
Dawkins (1987), who has done careful investigations of the moral implications of animal heterophenomenology. (Her early work is reported

=== p. 449 ===

in her book Animal Suffering: The Science of Animal Welfare, 1980.)
As she notes, our moral attitudes towards other animals are full of
inconsistencies.
        We have only to think of various different sorts of animals to show
        up our inconsistencies. There are demonstrations against killing
        baby harp seals, but there are no comparable campaigns to stop
        the killing of rats. Many people are quite happy to eat pigs or
        sheep but horrified by the idea of eating dogs or horses. Ip. 150]
       Dawkins points out that there are two main strands to this tangle:
the ability to reason and the ability to suffer. Descartes made much of
the inability of nonhuman animals to reason (at least the way human
beings reason), which provoked a famous response from the British
utilitarian philosopher Jeremy Bentham: "a full-grown horse or dog is
beyond comparison a more rational, as well as a more conversible
animal than an infant of a day or a week, or even a month old. But
suppose they were otherwise, what would it avail? The question is not,
Can they reason? nor, Can they talk, but Can they suffer?" (Bentham,
1789) These usually appear to be opposing benchmarks of moral standing, but as Dawkins argues, "giving ethical value to the ability to suffer
will in the end lead us to value animals that are clever. Even if we start
out by rejecting Descartes' reasoning criterion, it is the reasoning animals that are the ones most likely to possess the capacity to suffer" (p.
153).
      The reasons for this are implicit in the theory of consciousness
we have developed. Suffering is not a matter of being visited by some
ineffable but intrinsically awful state, but of having one's life hopes,
life plans, life projects blighted by circumstances imposed on one's
desires, thwarting one's intentions — whatever they are. The idea of
suffering being somehow explicable as the presence of some intrinsic
property — horribility, let's say — is as hopeless as the idea of amusement being somehow explicable as the presence of intrinsic hilarity.
So the presumed inaccessibility, the ultimate unknowability, of another's suffering is just as misleading as the other fantasies about intrinsic
qualia we have unmasked, though more obviously pernicious. It follows — and this does strike an intuitive chord — that the capacity to
suffer is a function of the capacity to have articulated, wide-ranging,
highly discriminative desires, expectations, and other sophisticated
mental states.
      Human beings are not the only creatues smart enough to suffer:
Bentham's horse and dog show by their behavior that they have enough

=== p. 450 ===

mental complexity to distinguish — and care about — a spectrum of
pains and other impositions that is far from negligible, even if it is a
narrow window compared to the scope of possibilities of human suffering. Other mammals, notably apes, elephants, and dolphins, apparently have much greater ranges.
      In compensation for having to endure all the suffering, the smart
creatures get to have all the fun. You have to have a cognitive economy
with a budget for exploration and self-stimulation to provide the space
for the recursive stacks of derived desires that make fun possible. You
have taken a first step when your architecture permits you to appreciate
the meaning of "Stop it, I love it!" Shallow versions of this building
power are manifest in some higher species, but it takes a luxuriant
imagination, and leisure time — something most species cannot afford — to grow a broad spectrum of pleasures. The greater the scope,
the richer the detail, the more finely discriminative the desires, the
worse it is when those desires are thwarted.
      But why should it matter, you may want to ask, that a creature's
desires are thwarted if they aren't conscious desires? I reply: Why would
it matter more if they were conscious — especially if consciousness
were a property, as some think, that forever eludes investigation? Why
should a "zombie's" crushed hopes matter less than a conscious person's crushed hopes? There is a trick with mirrors here that should be
exposed and discarded. Consciousness, you say, is what matters, but
then you cling to doctrines about consciousness that systematically
prevent us from getting any purchase on why it matters. Postulating
special inner qualities that are not only private and intrinsically valuable, but also unconfirmable and uninvestigatable is just obscurantism.
      Dawkins shows how the investigatable differences — the only differences that could possibly matter — can be experimentally explored,
and it is worth a few details to show how much insight can be gleaned
even from simple experiments with a rather unprepossessing species.

     Hens kept outside or in large litter pens spend a lot of their time
     scratching around and I therefore suspected that the lack of litter
     in battery cages might cause hens to suffer. Sure enough, when I
     gave them a choice between a cage with a wire floor and one with
     litter in which they could scratch, they chose the litter-floored
     cage. In fact they would enter a tiny cage (so small that they could
     hardly turn round) if this was the only way they could gain access
     to litter. Even birds which had been reared all their lives in cages

=== p. 451 ===

     and had never before had experience of litter chose the cage with
     litter on the floor. Although this was suggestive, it was not enough.
     I had to show that not only did the hens have a preference for
     litter but also that they had a preference which was strong enough
     to say that they might suffer if kept without it.
            Hens were then offered a slightly different choice. This time
     they had to choose between a wire-floored cage which had food
     and water and a litter-floored cage without food and water.  .   .The.

     result was that they spent a lot of time in the litter cage, with
     much less time being spent in the wire cage, even though this was
     the only place they could feed and drink. Then a complication
     was introduced. The birds had to "work" to move between the
     cages. They either had to jump from a corridor or push through
     a curtain of black plastic. So changing from one cage to another
     now had a cost.. The hens still spent the same amount of time

     in the wire cage with food as previously when there was no difficulty in entering it. But they spent hardly any time in the litter
     cage. They simply didn't seem prepared to work or pay any cost
     to get into the litter cage. .. Quite contrary to what I had expected,
                                  .

     the birds seemed to be saying that litter did not really matter to
     them. [pp. 157—1591

     She concludes that "Suffering by the emotional mind is revealed
by animals that have enough of a rational mind to be able to do something about the conditions that make them suffer," and she goes on to
note that "it is also likely that organisms without the capacity to do
anything to remove themselves from a source of danger would not
evolve the capacity to suffer. There would be no evolutionary point in
a tree which was having its branches cut off having the capacity to
suffer in silence" (p. 159). As we saw in chapter 7 (see also chapter 3,
footnote 9), one must be careful in framing such evolutionary arguments
about function, for history plays a big role in evolution, and history
can play tricks. But in the absence of positive grounds for imputing
suffering, or positive grounds for suspecting that such positive grounds
are for one reason or another systematically concealed, we should conclude that there is no suffering. We need not fear that this austere rule
will lead us to slight our obligations to our fellow creatures. It still
provides ample grounds for positive conclusions: Many, but not all,
animals are capable of significant degrees of suffering. A more persuasive case in support of humane treatment can be mounted by acknowledging the vast differences in degrees, than by piously promulgating

=== p. 452 ===

an unsupportable dogma about the universality and equality of animal
pain.
      This may settle the objective question about the presence or absence of suffering, but it does not settle the moral sentiments upset by
the prospect of explaining consciousness in such heartlessly mechanistic ways. There is more at stake.
      I have a farm in Maine. and I love the fact that there are bears and
coyotes living in my woods. I very seldom see them, or even see signs
of their presence, but I just like knowing that they are there, and would
be very unhappy to learn that they had left. I would also not feel myself
entirely compensated for the loss if some of my Al friends stocked my
woods with lots of robot beasties (though the idea, if imagined in detail,
is enchanting). It matters to me that there are wild creatures, descendants of wild creatures, living so close to me. Similarly, it delights me
that there are concerts going on in the Boston area that I not only do
not hear, but never even hear about.
      These are facts of a special sort. They are facts that are important
to us simply because one part of the environment that matters to us is
our belief environment. And since we are not easily gulled into continuing to believe propositions after the support for them has evaporated, it mailers to us that the beliefs be true, even when we won't
ourselves see any direct evidence for them. Like any other part of the
environment, a belief environment can be fragile, composed of parts
that are interconnected by both historical accidents and well-designed
links. Consider, for instance, that delicate part of our belief environment
concerned with the disposition of our bodies after death. Few people
believe that the soul resides in the body after death — even people who
believe in souls don't believe that. And yet few if any of us would
tolerate a "reform" that encouraged people to dispose of their dead kin
by putting them in plastic bags in the trash, or otherwise unceremoniously discarding them. Why not? Not because we believe that corpses
can actually suffer some indignity. A corpse can no more suffer an
indignity than a log can. And yet, the idea is shocking, repulsive. Why?
      The reasons are complex, but we can distill a few simple points
for now. A person is not just a body; a person has a body. That corpse
is the body of dear old Jones, a Center of Narrative Gravity that owes
its reality as much to our collaborative efforts of mutual heterophe-nomenological interpretation as to the body that is now lifeless. The
boundaries of Jones are not identical to the boundaries of Jones's body,
and the interests of Jones, thanks to the curious human practice of self-spinning, can extend beyond the basic biological interests that spawned

=== p. 453 ===

the practice. We treat his corpse with respect because it is important
for the preservation of the belief environment in which we all live, if
we start treating corpses as garbage, for instance, it might change the
way we treat near-corpses — those who are still alive but dying. If we
don't err on the side of prolonging the rituals and practices of respect
well beyond the threshold of death, the dying (and those who care
about them) will face an anxiety, an affront, a possibility, that risks
offending them. Treating a corpse "badly" may not directly harm any
dying person, and certainly doesn't harm the corpse, but, if it became
common practice and this became widely known (as it would), this
would significantly change the belief environment that surrounds
dying. People would imagine the events that were due to follow their
demise differently from the way they now imagine them, and in ways
that would be particularly depressing. Maybe not for any good reason,
but so what? if people are going to be depressed, that in itself is a good
reason for not adopting a policy.
      So there are indirect, but still creditable, legitimate, weighty reasons for continuing to respect corpses. We don't need any mythology
about something special that actually resides in corpses that makes
them privileged. That might be a useful myth to spread among the
unsophisticated, but it would be patronizing in the extreme to think
that we among the better informed had to preserve such myths. Similarly, there are perfectly good reasons for treating all living animals
with care and solicitude. These reasons are somewhat independent of
the facts about just which animals feel which kinds of pain. They
depend more directly on the fact that various beliefs are ambient in
our culture, and matter to us, whether they ought to matter or not. Since
they now matter, they matter. But the rationality of the belief environment — the fact that silly or baseless beliefs do tend to be extinguished
in the long run, in spite of superstition — does imply that things that
matter now may not always matter.
      But then, as we anticipated in chapter 2, a theory that radically
assaults the general belief environment has a genuine potential for
doing harm, for causing suffering (in people who particularly care about
animals, for instance, whether or not what happens to the animals
amounts to suffering). Does this mean that we should suppress the
investigation of these issues, for fear of opening Pandora's box? That
might be justified, if we could convince ourselves that our current belief
environment, myth-ridden or not, was clearly a morally acceptable,
benign environment, but I submit that it is clear that it is not. Those
who are worried about the costs threatened by this unasked-for enlight-

=== p. 454 ===

enment should take a hard look at the costs of the current myths. Do
we really think what we are currently confronted with is worth protecting with some creative obscurantism? Do we think, for instance,
that vast resources should be set aside to preserve the imaginary prospects of a renewed mental life for deeply comatose people, while there
are no resources to spare to enhance the desperate, but far from imaginary, expectations of the poor? Myths about the sanctity of life, or of
consciousness, cut both ways. They may be useful in erecting bartiers
(against euthanasia, against capital punishment, against abortion,
against eating meat) to impress the unimaginative, but at the price of
offensive hypocrisy or ridiculous self-deception among the more enlightened.
      Absolutist barriers, like the Maginot Line, seldom do the work
they were designed for. The campaign that used to be waged against
materialism has already succumbed to embartassment, and the campaign against "strong A!," while equally well intentioned, can offer
only the most threadbare alternative models of the mind. Surely it
would be better to try to foster an appreciation for the nonabsolutist,
nonintrinsic, nondichotomized grounds for moral concern that can coexist with our increasing knowledge of the inner workings of that most
amazing machine, the brain. The moral arguments on both sides of the
issues of capital punishment, abortion, eating meat, and experimenting
on nonhuman animals, for instance, are raised to a higher, more appropriate standard when we explicitly jettison the myths that are beyond protection in any case.

     4. CONSCIOUSNESS EXPLAINED, OR EXPLAINED AWAY?

      When we learn that the only difference between gold and silver
is the number of subatomic particles in their atoms, we may feel cheated
or angry — those physicists have explained something away: The gold-ness is gone from gold; they've left out the very silveriness of silver
that we appreciate. And when they explain the way reflection and
absorption of electromagnetic radiation accounts for colors and color
vision, they seem to neglect the very thing that matters most. But of
course there has to be some "leaving out" — otherwise we wouldn't
have begun to explain. Leaving something out is not a feature of failed
explanations, but of successful explanations.
     Only a theory that explained conscious events in terms of unconscious events could explain consciousness at all. If your model of how
pain is a product of brain activity still has a box in it labeled "pain,"

=== p. 455 ===

you havent yet begun to explain what pain is, and if your model of
consciousness carries along nicely until the magic moment when you
have to say "then a miracle occurs" you haven't begun to explain what
consciousness is.
      This leads some people to insist that consciousness can never be
explained. But why should consciousness be the only thing that cant
be explained? Solids and liquids and gases can be explained in terms
of things that aren't themselves solids or liquids or gases. Surely life
can be explained in terms of things that aren't themselves alive— and
the explanation doesn't leave living things lifeless. The illusion that
consciousness is the exception comes about, I suspect, because of a
failure to understand this general feature of successful explanation.
Thinking, mistakenly, that the explanation leaves something out, we
think to save what otherwise would be lost by putting it back into the
observer as a quale — or some other "intrinsically" wonderful property.
The psyche becomes the protective skirt under which all these beloved
kittens can hide. There may be motives for thinking that consciousness
cannot be explained, but, I hope I have shown, there are good reasons
for thinking that it can.
      My explanation of consciousness is far from complete. One might
even say that it was just a beginning, but it is a beginning, because it
breaks the spell of the enchanted circle of ideas that made explaining
consciousness seem impossible. I haven't replaced a metaphorical theory, the Cartesian Theater, with a nonmetaphorical ("literal, scientific')
theory. All I have done, really, is to replace one family of metaphors
and images with another, trading in the Theater, the Witness, the Central Meaner, the Figment, for Software, Virtual Machines, Multiple
Drafts, a Pandemonium of Homunculi. It's just a war of metaphors, you
say — but metaphors are not "just" metaphors; metaphors are the tools
of thought. No one can think about consciousness without them, so it
is important to equip yourself with the best set of tools available. Look
what we have built with our tools. Could you have imagined it without
them?

