=== chunk: dennett-1991-consciousness-explained/ch4-method-phenomenology ===
title: A Method for Phenomenology
source_pdf: docs/sources/dennett-1991-consciousness-explained/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 81-115
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 66
plan_page_end: 100
extracted_pages: 34 (plan nominally 35; trailing blank trimmed)
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 66 ===

                                             A METHOD FOR
                                        PHENOMENOLOGY

      1. FIRST PERSON PLURAL

       You don't do serious zoology by just strolling through the zoo,
 noting this and that, and marveling at the curiosities. Serious zoology
 demands precision, which depends on having agreed-upon methods of
 description and analysis, so that other zoologists can be sure they understand what you're saying. Serious phenomenology is in even greater
 need of a clear, neutral method of description, because, it seems, no
 two people use the words the same way, and everybody's an expert. It
 is just astonishing to see how often "academic" discussions of phenomenological controversies degenerate into desk-thumping cacophony, with everybody talking past everybody else. This is all the more
 surprising, in a way, because according to long-standing philosophical
 tradition, we all agree on what we find when we "look inside" at our
 own phenomenology.
       Doing phenomenology has usually seemed to be a reliable communal practice, a matter of pooling shared observations. When Des-cartes wrote his Meditations as a first-person-singular soliloquy, he
clearly expected his readers to concur with each of his observations,
by performing in their own minds the explorations he described, and
getting the same results. The British Empiricists, Locke, Berkeley, and
Hume, likewise wrote with the presumption that what they were doing,
much of the time, was introspecting, and that their introspections
would be readily replicated by their readers. Locke enshrined this presumption in his Essay Concerning Human Understanding (1690) by

=== p. 67 ===

                                 A METHOD FOR PHENOMENOL.OGY         67

calling his method the "historical, plain method" — no abstruse deductions or a priori theorizing for him, just setting down the observed
facts, reminding his readers of what was manifest to all who looked.
In fact, just about every author who has written about consciousness
has made what we might call the first-person-plural presumption:
Whatever mysteries consciousness may hold, we (you, gentle reader,
and I) may speak comfortably together about our mutual
the things we both find in our streams of consciousness. And with a
few obstreperous exceptions, readers have always gone along with the
conspiracy.
      This would be fine if it weren't for the embarrassing fact that
controversy and contradiction bedevil the claims made under these
conditions of polite mutual agreement. We are fooling ourselves about
something. Perhaps we are fooling ourselves about the extent to which
we are all basically alike. Perhaps when people first encounter the
different schools of thought on                        they join the school
that sounds right to them, and each school of        phenomenological      description is basically right about its own members'        sorts of inner life,
and then just innocently overgeneralizes, making unsupported claims
about how it is with everyone.
       Or perhaps we are fooling ourselves about the high reliability of
Introspection, our personal powers of self-observation of our own conscious minds. Ever since Descartes and his "cogito ergo sum," this
capacity of ours has been seen as somehow immune to error; we have
privileged access to our own thoughts and feelings, an access guaranteed to be better than the access of any outsider. ("Imagine anyone
 trying to tell you that you are wrong about what you are thinking and
 feeling!") We are either "infallible" — always guaranteed to be right —
 or at least "incorrigible" — right or wrong, no one else could correct
 us (Rorty, 1970).
       But perhaps this doctrine of infallibility is just a mistake, however
 well entrenched. Perhaps even if we are all basically alike in our phenomenology, some observers just get it all wrong when they try to
 describe it, but since they are so sure they are right, they are relatively
 invulnerable to correction. (They are incorrigible in the derogatory
 sense.) Either way, controversy ensues. And there is yet another possibility, which I think is much closer to the truth: what we are fooling
 ourselves about is the idea that the activity of "introspection" is ever
 a matter of just "looking and seeing." I suspect that when we claim to
 be just using our powers of inner observation, we are always actually
 engaging in a sort of impromptu theorizing — and we are remarkably

=== p. 68 ===

   gullible theorizers, precisely because there is so little to "observe" and
   so much to pontificate about without fear of contradiction. When we
   introspect, communally, we are really very much in the position of the
   legendary blind men examining different parts of the elephant. This
   seems at first to be a preposterous idea, but let us see what can be said
   for it.
         Did anything you encountered in the tour of the phenom in the
   previous chapter surprise you? Were you surprised, for instance, that
  you could not identify the playing card until it was almost dead center
  in front of you? Most people, I find, are surprised — even those who
  know about the limited acuity of peripheral vision. If it surprised you,
  that must mean that had you held forth on the topic before the surprising
  demonstration, you would very likely have got it wrong. People often
  claim a direct acquaintance with more content in their peripheral visual
  field than in fact they have. Why do people make such claims? Not
  because they directly and incorrigibly observed themselves to enjoy
  such peripheral content, but because it seems to stand to reason. After
  all, you       notice any gaping blanks in your visual field under normal
  conditions, and surely if there was an area there that            positively
  colored,          notice the discrepancy, and besides, everywhere you
  look, there you find everything colored and detailed. If you think that
 your subjective visual field is basically an inner picture composed of
 colored shapes, then it stands to reason that each portion of the canvas
 must be colored some color — even raw canvas is some color! But that
 is a conclusion drawn from a dubious model of your subjective visual
 field, not anything you directly observe. -
         Am I saying we have absolutely no privileged access to our conscious experience? No, but I am saying that we tend to think we are
 much more immune to error than we are. People generally admit, when
 challenged in this way about their privileged                that they don't
 have any special access to the causes and effects of their conscious
 experiences. For instance, they may be surprised to learn that they taste
 with their noses or hear bass notes through their            but they never
 claimed to be authoritative about the causes or sources of their experiences. They are authoritative, they say, only about the experiences
themselves, in isolation from their causes and effects. But although
people may say they are ciaiming authority only about the isolated
contents of their experiences, not their causes and effects, they often
overstep their self-imposed restraints. For instance, would you be prepared to bet on the following propositions? (I made up at least one of
them.)

=== p. 69 ===

     (1) You can experience a patch that is red and green all over at
         the same time — a patch that is both colors (not mixed) at
         once.
     (2) If you look at a yellow circle on a blue background (in good
         light), and the luminance or brightness of the yellow and blue
         are then adjusted to be equal, the boundary between the yellow
         and blue disappears.
     (3) There is a sound, sometimes called the auditory barber pole,
         which seems to keep on rising in pitch forever, without ever
         getting any higher.
     (4) There is an herb an overdose of which makes you incapable
         of understanding spoken sentences in your native language.
         Until the effect wears off, your hearing is unimpaired, with
         no fuzziness or added noise, but the words you hear sound to
         you like an entirely foreign language, even though you somehow know they aren't.
     (5) if you are blindfolded, and a vibrator is applied to a point on
         your ann while you touch your nose, you will feel your nose
         growing like Pinocchio's; if the vibrator is moved to another
         point, you will then have the eerie feeling of pushing your
          nose inside out, with your index finger coming to rest somewhere inside your skull.
      In fact, I made up number 4, though for all I know it might be
true. After all, in the well-studied neuropathology called prosopagno-sia, your vision is completely unimpaired and you can readily identify
most things by sight, but the faces of your closest friends and associates
are entirely unrecognizable.' My point, once again, is not that you have
no privileged access to the nature or content of your conscious experience, but just that we should be alert to vety tempting overconfidence
on that score.
      During the guided tour of the phenom, I proposed a number of
simple experiments for you to do. This was not in the spirit of "pure"
phenomenology. Phenomenologists tend to argue that since we are
not authoritative about the physiological causes and effects of our
phenomenology, we should ignore such causes and effects in our at-

      I. For the red and green patch, see Crane and Piantanida (1983) and Hardin (1988);
for the disappearing color boundary, the Liebmann (1927) effect. see Spiliman and Werner
(1990): for the auditory barber pole, see Shepard (1964): for the Pinocchio effect. see
Lackner (1988). For more on prosopagnosia. see Damasio. Damasio. and Van Floesen
(1982); Tranel and Damasio (1988); Tranel, Damasio and Damasio (1988).

=== p. 70 ===

 tempt to give a pure, neutral, pretheoretical description of what we
 find "given" in the course of everyday experience. Perhaps, but then
 just see how many curious denizens of the phenom we would never
 even meet! A zoologist who attempted to extrapolate the whole science
 from observation of a dog, a cat, a horse, a robin, and a goldfish would
 probably miss a few things.

      2. THE THIRD-PERSON PERSPECTIVE

      Since we are going to indulge in impure phenomenology, we need
 to be more careful than ever about method. The standard perspective
 adopted by phenomenologists is Descartes's first-person perspective,
 in which I describe in a monologue (which I let you overhear) what I
 find in my conscious experience, counting on us to agree. I have tried
 to show, however, that the cozy complicity of the resultingfirst-personplural perspective is a treacherous incubator of errors. in the history
 of psychology, in fact, it was the growing recognition of this methodological problem that led to the downfall of Introspectionism and the
 rise of Behaviorism. The Behaviorists were meticulous about avoiding
 speculation about what was going on in my mind or your mind or his
 or her or its mind. In effect, they championed the third-person perspective, in which only facts garnered "from the outside" count as data.
 You can videotape people in action and then measure error rates on
 tasks involving bodily motion, or reaction times when pushing buttons
 or levers, pulse rate, brain waves, eye movements, blushing (so long as
 you have a machine that measures it objectively), and galvanic skin
 response (the electrical conductivity detected by "lie detectors"). You
 can open up subjects' skulls (surgically or by brain-scanning devices)
 to see what is going on in their brains, but you must not make any
 assumptions about what is going on in their minds, for that is something
you         get any data about while using the intersubjectively verifiable
methods of physical science.
      The idea at its simplest was that since you can never "see directly"
into people's minds, but have to take their word for it, any such facts
as there are about mental events are not among the data of science,
since they can never be properly verified by objective methods. This
methodological scruple, which is the ruling principle of all experimental psychology and neuroscience today (not just "behaviorist" research), has too often been elevated into one or another ideological
principle, such as:

=== p. 71 ===

     Mental events don't exist. (Period! — this has been well called
       "barefoot behaviorism.")
     Mental events exist, but they have no effects whatever, so science
      can't study them (epiphenomenalism — see chapter 12, section
        5).
     Mental events exist, and have effects, but those effects can't be
      studied by science, which will have to content itself with theories of the "peripheral" or "lower" effects and processes in
      the brain. (This view is quite common among neuroscientists,
       especially those who are dubious of "theorizers." It is actually
       dualism; these researchers apparently agree with Descartes that
       the mind is not the brain, and they are prepared to settle for
       having a theory of the brain alone.)

     These views all jump to one unwarranted conclusion or another.
Even if mental events are not among the data of science, this does not
mean we cannot study them scientifically. Black holes and genes are
not among the data of science, but we have developed good scientific
theories of them. The challenge is to construct a theory of mental events,
using the data that scientific method permits.
     Such a theory will have to be constructed from the third-person
point of view, since all science is constructed from that
Some people will tell you that such a theory of the conscious mind is
impossible. Most notably, the philosopher Thomas Nagel has claimed
that

     There are things about the world and life and ourselves that cannot
     be adequately understood from a maximally objective standpoint,
     however much it may extend our understanding beyond the point
     from which we started. A great deal is essentially connected to a
     particular point of view, or type of point of view, and the attempt
     to give a complete account of the world in objective terms detached
     from these perspectives inevitably leads to false reductions or to
     outright denial that certain patently real phenomena exist at all.
     [Nagel, 1986, p. 7]

We shall see. It is premature to argue about what can and can't be
accounted for by a theory until we see what the theory actually says.
But if we are to give a fair hearing to a theory, in the face of such
skepticism, we will need to have a neutral way of describing the data —
a way that does not prejudge this issue. It might seem that no such

=== p. 72 ===

 method could exist, but in fact there is such a neutral method, which
 I   will first describe, and then adopt.

        3. THE METHOD OF HETEROPHENOMENOLOGy2

      The term is ominous; not just phenomenology but heterophenom-enology. What can it be? It is in fact something familiar to us all, layman
 and scientist alike, but we must introduce it with fanatical caution,
 noting exactly what it presupposes and implies, since it involves taking
a giant theoretical step. Ignoring all tempting shortcuts, then, here is
 the neutral path leading from objective physical science and its insistence on the third-person point of view, to a method of phenomenological description that can (in principle) do justice to the most
private and ineffable subjective experiences, while never abandoning
the methodological scruples of science.
      We want to have a theory of consciousness, but there is controversy about just which entities have consciousness. Do newborn human
babies? Do frogs? What about oysters, ants, plants, robots, zombies. .
We should remain neutral about all this for the time being, but there
is one class of entities that is held by just about everyone to exhibit
consciousness, and that is our fellow adult human beings.
      Now, some of these adult human beings may be zombies — in the
philosophers' "technical" sense. The term zombie apparently comes
from Haitian voodoo lore and refers, in that context, to a "living dead"
person, punished for some misdeed and doomed to shuffle around,
mumbling and staring out of dead-looking eyes, mindlessly doing the
bidding of some voodoo priest or shaman, We have all seen zombies
in horror movies, and they are iiumediately distinguishable from normal people. (Roughly speaking, Haitian zombies can't dance, tell jokes,
hold animated philosophical discussions, keep up their end in a witty
conversation — and they look just               But philosophers use the

     2. This and the following sections draw on several earlier accounts of mine of the
methodological underpinnings of heterophenomenology: Dennett (1978c. 1982a).
       3. Several years ago. Wade Davis, a young Harvard-trained anthropologist, announced that he had deciphered the mystery of voodoo zombies, and in his book The
Serpent and the Hainbow (1985) described the neuropharmacological potion prepared
by voodoo practitioners that can putatively put human beings into a deathlike state: after
being buried alive for several days. these unfortunate people are sometimes exhumed
and given a hallucinogen that causes some disorientation and amnesia. As a result of
either the hallucinogen or brain damage caused by oxygen deprivation during their
entombment, they then do indeed shuffle about roughly the way the zombies in the

=== p. 73 ===

term zombie for a different category of imaginary human being. According to common agreement among philosophers, a zombie is or
would be a human being who exhibits perfectly natural, alert, loquacious, vivacious behavior but is in fact not conscious at all, but rather
some sort of automaton. The whole point of the philosopher's notion
of zombie is that you can't tell a zombie from a normal person by
examining external behavior. Since that is all we ever get to see of
our friends and neighbors, some of your best friends may be zombies.
That, at any rate, is the tradition I must be neutral about at the outset. So, while the method I describe makes no assumption about the
actual consciousness of any apparently normal adult human beings,
it does focus on this class of normal adult human beings, since if consciousness is anywhere, it is in them. Once we have seen what the
outlines of a theory of human consciousness might be, we can turn
our attention to the consciousness (if any) of other species, including chimpanzees, dolphins, plants, zombies, Martians, and pop-up
toasters (philosophers often indulge in fantasy in their thought experiments).
      Adult human beings (henceforth, people) are studied in many
sciences. Their bodies are probed by biologists and medical researchers,
nutritionists, and engineers (who ask such questions as: How fast can
human fingers type? What is the tensile strength of human hair?). They
are also studied by psychologists and neuroscientists, who place individual people, called subjects, in various experimental situations.
For most experiments, the subjects first must be 'categorized and prepared. Not only must it be established how old they are, which gender,
right- or left-handed, how much schooling, and so forth, but they must
be told what to do. This is the most striking difference between human
subjects and, say, the biologist's virus cultures, the engineer's samples
of exotic materials, the chemist's solutions, the animal psychologist's
rats, cats, and pigeons.
      People are the only objects of scientific study the preparation of
which typically (but not always) involves verbal communication. This
 is partly a matter of the ethics of science: people may not be used in
 experiments without their informed consent, and it is simply not

movies do, and on occasion they may have been enslaved. Because of the sensational
nature of Davis's claims (and the film loosely based on his novelistic book). his discoveries
have met with an undercurrent of skepticism in some quarters, but these are well rebutted
in a second, more scholarly, book, Passage of DQrkness: The Ethnobiology of the Haitian
Zombie (1988). See also Booth (1988) and Davis (1988b).

=== p. 74 ===

 possible to obtain informed consent without verbal interaction. But
 even more important, from our point of view, is the fact that verbal
 communication is used to set up and constrain the experiments. Subjects are asked to perform various intellectual tasks, solve problems,
  look for items in displays, press buttons, make judgments, and so forth.
  The validity of most experiments depends on this preparation being
  done uniformly and successfully. if it turns out, for instance, that the
  instructions were given in Turkish to subjects whose only language was
  English, the failure of the experiment is pretty well guaranteed. In fact,
  evidence of even minor misunderstandings of instructions can compromise experiments, so it is a matter of some concern that this practice
 of preparing human subjects with verbal communication be validated.
        What is involved in this practice of talking to subjects? It is an
 ineliminable element in psychological experiments, but does it presuppose the consciousness of the subjects? Don't experimenters then
 end up back with the Introspectionists, having to take a subject's un-testable word for what he or she understands? Don't we run some risk
 of being taken in by zombies or robots or other impostors?
        We must look more closely at the details of a generic human
 subject experiment. Suppose, as is often the case, that multiple recordings are made of the entire experiment: videotape and sound tape, and
 electroencephalograph, and so forth. Nothing that is not thus recorded
 will we count as data. Let's focus on the recording of sounds — vocal
 sounds mainly — made by the subjects and experimenters during the
 experiment. Since the sounds made by the subjects are made by physical means, they are in principle explainable and predictable by physics, using the same principles, laws, models that we use to explain and
 predict automobile engine noises or thunderclaps. Or, since the sounds
are made by physiological means, we could add the principles of physiology and attempt to explain the sounds using the resources of that
science, just as we explain belches, snores, growling stomachs, and
creaking joints. But the sounds we are primarily interested in, of course,
are the vocal sounds, and more particularly the subset of them (ignoring
the occasional burps, sneezes, and yawns) that are apparently amenable
to a linguistic or semantic analysis. It is not always obvious just which
sounds to include in this subset, but there is a way of playing it safe:
we give copies of the tape recordings to three trained stenographers
and have them independently prepare transcripts of the raw data.
       This simple step is freighted with implications; we move by it
from one world — the world of mere physical sounds — into another:
the world of words and meanings, syntax and semantics. This step

=== p. 75 ===

yields a radical reconstrual of the data, an abstraction from its acoustic
and other physical properties to strings of words (though still adorned
with precise timing — see, e.g., Ericsson and Simon, 1984). What governs this reconstrual? Although there presumably are regular and discoverable relationships between the physical properties of the acoustic
wave recorded on the tape and the phonemes that the typists hear and
then further transcribe into words, we don't yet know enough about
the relationships to describe them in detail. (If we did, the problem of
making a machine that could take dictation would be solved. Although
great progress has been made on this, there are still some major perplexities.) Pending the completion of that research in acoustics and
phonology, we can still trust our transcripts as objective renditions of
the data so long as we take a few elementary precautions. First, having
stenographers prepare the transcripts (instead of entrusting that job to
the experimenter, for instance) guards against both willful and unwitting bias or overinterpretation. (Court stenographers fulfill the same
neutral role.) Having three independent transcripts prepared gives us
a measure of how objective the process is. Presumably, if the recording
is good, the transcripts will agree word-for-word on all but a tiny fraction of one percent of the words. Wherever the transcripts disagree, we
can simply throw out the data if we wish, or use agreement of two out
of three transcripts to fix the transcript of record.
      The transcript or text is not, strictly speaking, given as data, for,
as we have seen, it is created by putting the raw data through a process
of interpretation. This process of interpretation depends on assumptions about which language is being spoken, and on some of the speaker's intentions. To bring this out clearly, compare the task we have
given the stenographers with the task of typing up transcripts of recordings of birdsongs or pig grunts. When the human speaker utters
"Djamind if a push da buddin wid ma leff hand" the stenographers all
agree that he asked, "Do you mind if I push the button with my left
hand?" — but that is because they know English. and this is what makes
sense, obviously, in the context. And if the subject says, "Now the spot
is moving from reft to light" we will allow the stenographers to improve
this to "Now the spot is moving from left to right." No similar purification strategy is available for transcribing birdsongs or pig grunts —
at least not until some researcher discovers that there are norms for
such noises, and devises and codifies a description system.
      We effortlessly — in fact involuntarily — "make sense" of the
sound stream in the process of turning it into words. (We had better
allow the stenographers to change "from reft to light" to "from left to

=== p. 76 ===

 right," for they will probably change it without even noticing.) The fact
 that the process is both highly reliable and all but unnoticeable in
 normal circumstances should not conceal from us the fact that it is a
 sophisticated process even when it doesn't proceed all the way to understanding but stops short at word recognition. When the stenographer
transcribes "To me, there was a plangent sort of thereness to my presentiment, a beckoning undercurrent of foretaste and affront, a manifold
of anticipatory confirmations that revealed surfaces behind surfaces,"
he may not have the faintest idea what this means, but be quite certain
that those were indeed the words the speaker intended to speak, and
succeeded in speaking, whatever they mean.
       It is always possible that the speaker also had no idea what the
words mean. The subject, after all, just might be a zombie, or a parrot
dressed up in a people suit, or a computer driving a speech-synthesizer
program. Or, less extravagantly, the subject may have been confused,
or in the grip of some ill-understood theory, or trying to play a trick
on the experimenter by spouting a lot of nonsense. For the moment, I
am saying, the process of creating a transcript or text from the data
record is neutral with regard to all these strange possibilities, even
though it proceeds with the methodological assumption that there is a
text to be recovered. When no text can be recovered, we had best throw
out the data on that subject and start over.
       So far, the method described is cut-and-dried and uncontroversial.
We have reached the bland conclusion that we can turn tape recordings
into texts without giving up science. We have taken our tune securing
this result, because the next step is the one that creates the opportunity
to study consciousness empirically, but also creates most of the obstacles and confusions. We must move beyond the text; we must interpret
it as a record of speech acts; not mere pronunciations or recitations but
assertions, questions, answers, promises, comments, requests for clarification, out-loud musings, self-admonitions.
       This sort of interpretation calls for us to adopt what I call the
intentional stance (Dennett, 1971, 1978a, 1987a): we must treat the
noise-emitter as an agent, indeed a rational agent, who harbors beliefs
and desires and other mental states that exhibit intentionality or "aboutness," and whose actions can be explained (or predicted) on the basis
of the content of these states. Thus the uttered noises are to be interpreted as things the subjects wanted to say, of propositions they meant
to assert, for instance, for various reasons. In fact, we were already
relying on some such assumptions in the previous step of purifying the
text. (We reason: Why would anyone want to say "from reft to light"?)

=== p. 77 ===

      Whatever dangers we run by adopting the intentional stance toward these verbal behaviors, they are the price we must pay for gaining
access to a host of reliable tniisms we exploit in the design of experiments. There are many reasons for wanting to say things, and it is
important to exclude some of these by experimental design. Sometimes,
for instance, people want to say things not because they believe them
but because they believe their audience wants to hear them. It is usually
important to take the obvious steps to diminish the likelihood that this
desire is present or effective: we tell subjects that what we want to hear
is whatever they believe, and we take care not to let them know what
it is we hope they believe. We do what we can, in other words, to put
them in a situation in which, given the desires we have inculcated in
them (the desire to cooperate, to get paid, to be a good subject), they
will have no better option than to try to say what in fact they believe.
      Another application of the intentional stance toward our subjects
is required if we are to avail ourselves of such useful event-types as
button-pushing. Typically, pushing a button is a way of performing
some conventionally fixed speech act, such as asserting that the two
seen figures appear superimposed to me right now, or answering that
yes, my hurried, snap judgment (since you have told me that speed is
of the essence) is that the word that I have just heard was on the list I
heard a little while ago. For many experimental purposes, then, we
will want to unpack the meaning of these button-pushes and incorporate them as elements of the text. Which speech act a particular
button-pushing can be taken to execute depends on the intentional
interpretation of the interactions between subject and experimenter that
were involved in preparing the subject for the experiment. (Not all
button-pushing consists in speech acts; some may be make-believe
shooting, or make-believe rocket-steering, for instance.)
      When doubts arise about whether the subject has said what he
meant, or understood the problem, or knows the meanings of the words
being used, we can ask for clarifications. Usually we can resolve the
doubts. Ideally, the effect of these measures is to remove all likely
sources of ambiguity and uncertainty from the experimental situation,
so that one intentional interpretation of the text (including the button-pushings) has no plausible rivals. It is taken to be the sincere, reliable
expression by a single, unified subject of that very subject's beliefs and
opinions.4 As •we shall see, though, there are times when this

       4. In "How to Change Your Mind." in Brainstorms (1978a). I adopt a conventional
use of "opinion that permits me to draw a distinction between beliefs proper and other

=== p. 78 ===

presumption is problematic — especially when our subjects exhibit one
pathology or another. What should we make, for instance, of the apparently sincere complaints of blindness in cases of so-called hysterical
blindness, and the apparently sincere denials of blindness in blind
people with anosognosia (blindness denial or Anton's syndrome)?
These phenomena will be examined in later chapters, and if we are to
get at what these people are experiencing, it will not be by any straightforward interview alone.

      4. FICTIONAL WORLDS AND HETEROPHENOMENOLOGICAL
            WORLDS

      In addition to the particular problems raised by strange cases, there
rr    seem to be a general problem. Doesn't the very practice of inter-verbal behavior in this way presuppose the consciousness of
 ne subject and hence beg the zombie question? Suppose you are confronted by a "speaking" computer, and suppose you succeed in interpreting its output as speech acts expressing its beliefs and opinions,
presumably "about" its conscious states. The fact that there is a single,
coherent interpretation of a sequence of behavior doesn't establish that
the interpretation is true; it might be only as if the "subject" were
conscious; we risk being taken in by a zombie with no inner life at all.
You could not confirm that the computer was conscious of anything
by this method of interpretation. Fair enough. We can't be sure that the
speech acts we observe express real beliefs about actual experiences;
perhaps they express only apparent beliefs about nonexistent experiences. Still, the fact that we had found even one stable interpretation
of some entity's behavior as speech acts would always be a fact worthy
of attention. Anyone who found an intersubjectively uniform way of
interpreting the waving of a tree's branches in the breeze as "commentaries" by "the weather" on current political events would have found
something wonderful demanding an explanation, even if it turned
out to be effects of an ingenious device created by some prankish engineer.
      Happily, there is an analogy at hand to help us describe such facts

more language-infected states, which I call opinions. Animals without language can have
beliefs, but not opinions. People have both, but if you believe that tomorrow is Friday.
this should [n my terms be called your           that tomorrow is Friday. It is not the sort
of cognitive state one could have without language. while I will not presuppose familiarity with that distinction here. I do intend my claims to apply to both categories.

=== p. 79 ===

without at the same time presumptively explaining them: We can compare the heterophenomenologist's task of interpreting subjects' behavior to the reader's task of interpreting a work of fiction. Some texts,
such as novels and short stories, are known — or assumed — to be
           but this does not stand in the way of their interpretation. In
facts in some regards it makes the task of interpretation easier, by canceling or postponing difficult questions about sincerity, truth, and reference.
       Consider some uncontroversial facts about the semantics of fiction
(Walton, 1973, 1978; Lewis, 1978; Howell, 1979). A novel tells a story,
but not a true story, except by accident. In spite of our knowledge or
assumption that the story told is not true, we can, and do, speak of
what is true in the story. "We can truly say that Sherlock Holmes lived
in Baker Street and that he liked to show off his mental powers. We
cannot truly say that he was a devoted family man, or that he worked
in close cooperation with the police" (Lewis, 1978, p. 37). What is true
in the story is much, much more than what is explicitly asserted in the
text. It is true that there are no jet planes in Holmes's London (though
this is not asserted explicitly or even logically implied in the text), but
also true that there are piano tuners (though — as best I recall — none
is mentioned,               logically implied). In addition to what is true
and false in the story, there is a large indeterminate area: while it is
true that Holmes and Watson took the 11:10 from Waterloo Station to
Aldershot one summer's day, it is neither true nor false that that day
was a Wednesday ("The Crooked Man").
       There are delicious philosophical problems about how to say
(strictly) all the things we unperplexedly want to say when we talk
about fictions but these will not concern us. Perhaps some people are
deeply perplexed about the metaphysical status of fictional people and
objects, but not I. In my cheerful optimism I don't suppose there is any
deep philosophical problem about the way we should respond, ontologically, to the results of fiction; fiction is fiction; there is no Sherlock
Holmes. Setting aside the intricacies, then, and the ingenious technical
proposals for dealing with them, I want to draw attention to a simple
fact: the interpretation of fiction is undeniably do-able, with certain
uncontroversial results. First, the fleshing out of the story, the exploration of "the world of Sherlock Holmes," for instance, is not pointless
or idle; one can learn a great deal about a novel, about its text, about
the point, about the author, even about the real world, by learning
about the world portrayed by the novel. Second, if we are cautious
about identifying and excluding judgments of taste or preference (e.g.,

=== p. 80 ===

"Watson is a boring prig"), we can amass a volume of unchallengeably
objective fact about the world portrayed. All interpreters agree that
Holmes was smarter than Watson; in crashing obviousness lies objectivity.
      Third — and this fact is a great relief to students — knowledge of
the world portrayed by a novel can be independent of knowledge of
the actual text of the novel. I could probably write a passing term paper
on Madame Bovary, but Fve never read the novel — even in English
translation. I've seen the BBC television series, so I know the story. I
know what happens in that world. The general point illustrated is this:
facts about the world of a fiction are purely semantic level facts about
that fiction; they are independent of the syntactic facts about the text
(if the fiction is a text). We can compare the stage musical or the film
West Side Story with Shakespeare's play Romeo and Juliet; by describing similarities and differences in what happens in those worlds, we
see similarities in the works of art that are not describable in the terms
appropriate to the syntactical or textual (let alone physical) description
of the concrete instantiations of the fictions. The fact that in each world
there is a pair of lovers who belong to different factions is not a fact
about the vocabulary, sentence structure, length (in words or frames of
film), or size, shape, and weight of any particular physical instantiation
of the works.
       In general, one can describe what is represented in a work of art
(e.g., Madame Bovary) independently of describing how the representing is accomplished. (Typically, of course, one doesn't try for this
separation, and mixes commentary on the world portrayed with commentary on the author's means of accomplishing the portrayal, but the
separation is possible.) One can even imagine knowing enough about
a world portrayed to be able to identify the author of a fiction, in
ignorance of the text or anything purporting to be a faithful translation.
Learning indirectly what happens in a fiction one might be prepared
to claim: only Wodehouse could have invented that preposterous misadventure. We think we can identify sorts of events and circumstances
(and not merely sorts of descriptions of events and circumstances) as
Kafkaesque, and we are prepared to declare characters to be pure Shake-speare. Many of these plausible convictions are no doubt mistaken (as
ingenious experiments might show), but not all of them. I mention them
just to illustrate how much one might be able to glean just from what
is represented, in spite of having scant knowledge of how the representing is accomplished.

=== p. 81 ===

        Now let's apply the analogy to the problem facing the experimenter who wants to interpret the texts produced by subjects, without begging any questions about whether his subjects are zombies,
 computers, lying, or confused. Consider the advantages of adopting
 the tactic of interpreting these texts as fictions of a sort, not as literature of course, but as generators of a theorist's fiction (which might,
 of course, prove to be true after all). The reader of a novel lets the text
constitute a (fictional) world, a world determined by fiat by the text,
exhaustively extrapolated as far as extrapolation will go and indeterminate beyond; our experimenter, the heterophenomenologist, lets the
 subject's text constitute that subject's heterophenomenological world,
a world determined by fiat by the text (as interpreted) and indeterminate beyond. This permits the heterophenomenologist to postpone
the knotty problems about what the relation might be between that
 (fictional) world and the real world. This permits theorists to agree in
detail about just what a subject's heterophenomenological world is,
while offering entirely different accounts of how heterophenomenol-ogical worlds map onto events in the brain (or the soul, for that matter). The subject's heterophenomenological world will be a stable,
intersubjectively confirmable theoretical posit, having the same metaphysical status as, say, Sherlock Holmes's London or the world according to Garp.
       As in fiction, what the author (the apparent author) says goes.
More precisely, what the apparent author says provides a text that,
when interpreted according to the rules just mentioned, goes to stipulate the way a certain "world" is. We don't ask how Conan Doyle
came to know the color of Holmes's easy chair, and we don't raise the
possibility that he might have got it wrong; we do correct typographical
errors and otherwise put the best, most coherent, reading on the text
we can find. Similarly, we don't ask how subjects (the apparent subjects)
know what they assert, and we don't (at this point) even entertain the
possibility that they might be mistaken; we take them at their (interpreted) word. Note, too, that although novels often include a proviso
to the effect that the descriptions therein are not intended to portray
any real people, living or dead, the tactic of letting a text constitute a
world need not be restricted to literary works intended as fiction by
their authors; we can describe a certain biographer's Queen Victoria,
or the world of Henry Kissinger, with blithe disregard of the author's
presumed intentions to be telling the truth and to be referring, non-coincidentally, to real people.

=== p. 82 ===

     5. THE DISCREET CHARM OF THE ANTHROPOLOGIST

      This way of treating people as generators of a (theorists') fiction
is not our normal way of treating people. Simply conceding constitutive
authority to their pronouncements can be rather patronizing, offering
mock respect in the place of genuine respect. This comes out clearly
in a slightly different application of the heterophenomenological tactic
by anthropologists. An example will make the point clear. Suppose
anthropologists were to discover a tribe that believed in a hithertounheard-of god of the forest, called Feenoman. Upon learning of Feeno-man, the anthropologists are faced with a fundamental choice: they
may convert to the native religion and believe wholeheartedly in the
real existence and good works of Feenoman, or they can study the cult
with an agnostic attitude. Consider the agnostic path. While not believing in Feenoman, the anthropologists nevertheless decide to study
and systematize as best they can the religion of these people. They set
down descriptions of Feenoman given by native informants. They look
for agreement, but don't always find it (some say Feenoman is blue-eyed, others say he — or she — is brown-eyed). They seek to explain
and eliminate these disagreements, identifying and ignoring the wiseguys, exploring reformulations with their informants, and perhaps even
mediating disputes. Gradually a logical construct emerges: Feenoman
the forest god, complete with a list of traits and habits and a biography.
These agnostic scientists (who call themselves Feenomanologists), have
described, ordered, catalogued a part of the world constituted by the
beliefs of the natives, and (if they have done their job of interpretation
well) have compiled the definitive description of Feenoman. The beliefs
of the native believers (Feenomanists, we may call them) are authoritative (he's their god, after all), but only because Feenoman is being
treated as merely an "intentional object," a mere fiction so far as the
infidels are concerned, and hence as entirely a creature of the beliefs
(true or false) of the Feenomanists. Since those beliefs may contradict
each other, Feenoman, as logical construct, may have contradictory
properties attributed to him — but that's all right in the Feenomanol-ogists' eyes since he is only a construct to them. The Feenomanologists
try to present the best logical construct they can, but they have no
overriding obligation to resolve all contradictions. They are prepared
to discover unresolved and undismissible disagreements among the
      Feenomanists, of course, don't see it that way — by definition, for
they are the believers to whom Feenoman is no mere intentional object,

=== p. 83 ===

but someone as real as you or 1. Their attitude toward their own authority about the traits of Feenoman is — or ought to be — a bit more
complicated. On the one hand they do believe that they know all about
Feenoman — they are Feenomanists, after all, and who should know
better than they? Yet unless they hold themselves to have something
like papal infallibility, they allow as how they could in principle be
wrong in some details. They could just possibly be instructed about
the true nature of Feenoman. For instance, Feenoman himself might
set them straight about a few details. So they should be slightly ill at
ease about the bland credulity (as it appears to them) of the investigating
Feenomanologists, who almost always take them scrupulously at their
word, never challenging, never doubting, only respectfully asking
how to resolve ambiguities and apparent conflicts. A native Feeno-manist who fell in with the visiting anthropologists and adopted their
stance would have to adopt an attitude of distance or neutrality toward his own convictions (or shouldn't we say his own prior convictions?), and would in the process pass from the ranks of the truly
      The heterophenomenological method neither challenges nor accepts as entirely true the assertions of subjects, but rather maintains a
constructive and sympathetic neutrality, in the hopes of compiling a
definitive description of the world according to the subjects. Any subject made uneasy by being granted this constitutive authority might
protest: "No, really! These things I am describing to you are
real, and have exactly the properties I am asserting them to have!" The
heterophenomenologist's honest response might be to nod and assure
the subject that of course his sincerity was not being doubted. But since
believers in general want more — they want their assertions to be believed and, failing that, they want to know whenever their audience
disbelieves them — it is in general more politic for heterophenome-nologists, whether anthropologists or experimenters studying consciousness in the laboratory, to avoid drawing attention to their official
neutrality.
      That deviation from normal interpersonal relations is the price
that must be paid for the neutrality a science of consciousness demands.
Officially, we have to keep an open mind about whether our apparent
subjects are liars, zombies, or parrots dressed up in people suits, but
we don't have to risk upsetting them by advertising the fact. Besides,
this tactic of neutrality is only a temporary way station on the path to
devising and confirming an empirical theory that could in principle
vindicate the subjects.

=== p. 84 ===

     6. DISCOVERING WHAT SOMEONE IS REALLY TALKING ABOUT

       What would it be to confirm subjects beliefs in their own phenomenology? We can see the possibilities better with the help of our
analogies. Consider how we might confirm that some "novel" was in
fact a true (or largely true) biography. We might begin by asking: Upon
what real person in the author's acquaintance is this character modeled?
Is this character really the author's mother in disguise? What real events
in the author's childhood have been transmogrified in this fictional
episode? What is the author really trying to say? Asking the author
might well not be the best way of answering these questions, for the
author may not really know. Sometimes it can plausibly be argued that
the author has been forced, unwittingly, to express himself allegorically
or metaphorically. The only expressive resources available to the author — for whatever reason — did not permit a direct, factual, unme-taphorical recounting of the events he wished to recount; the story he
has composed is a compromise or net effect. As such it may be drastically reinterpreted (if necessary over the author's anguished protests)
to reveal a true tale, about real people and real events. Since, one may
sometimes argue, it is surely no coincidence that such-and-such a fictional character has these traits, we may reinterpret the text that portrays
this character in such a way that its terms can then be seen to refer —
in genuine, nonfictional reference — to the traits and actions of a real
person. Portraying fictional Molly as a slut may quite properly be seen
as slandering real Polly, for all the talk about Molly is really about
Polly. The author's protestations to the contrary may convince us,
rightly or wrongly, that the slander is not, in any event, a conscious or
deliberate slander, but we have long since been persuaded by Freud
and others that authors, like the rest of us, are often quite in the dark
about the deeper welisprings of their intentions. If there can be unconscious slander, there must be unwitting reference to go along with it.
      Or, to revert to our other analogy, consider what would happen
if an anthropologist confirmed that there really was a blue-eyed fellow
named Feenoman who healed the sick and swung through the forest
like Tarzan. Not a god, and not capable of flying or being in two places
at once, but still undoubtedly the real source of most of the sightings,
legends, beliefs of the Feenomanists. This would naturally occasion
some wrenching disillusionment among the faithful, some perhaps in
favor of revision and diminution of the creed, others holding out for
the orthodox version, even if it means yoking up the "real" Feenoman
(supernatural properties intact) in parallel with his flesh-and-blood

=== p. 85 ===

agent in the world. One could understand the resistance of the orthodox
to the idea that they could have been that wrong about Feenoman. And
unless the anthropologists' candidate for the real referent of Feeno-manist doctrine bore a striking resemblance, in properties and deeds,
to the Feenoman constituted by legend, they would have no warrant
for proposing any such discovery. (Compare: "I have discovered that
Santa Claus is real. He is in fact a tall, thin violinist living in Miami
under the name of Fred Dudley; he hates children and never buys
gifts.")
      My suggestion, then, is that if we were to find real goings-on in
people's brains that had enough of the "defining" properties of the
items that populate their heterophenomenological worlds, we could
reasonably propose that we had discovered what they were really talking about — even if they initially resisted the identifications. And if
we discovered that the real goings-on bore only a minor resemblance
to the heterophenomenological items, we could reasonably declare that
people were just mistaken in the beliefs they expressed, in spite of their
sincerity. It would always be open to someone to insist — like the
diehard Feenomanist — that the real phenomenological items accompanied the goings-on without being identical to them, but whether or
not this claim would carry conviction is another matter.
       Like anthropologists, we can remain neutral while exploring the
matter. This neutrality may seem pointless — isn't it simply unimaginable that scientists might discover neurophysiological phenomena that
just were the items celebrated by subjects in their heterophenomenol-ogles? Brain events seem too different from phenomenological items to
be the real referents of the beliefs we express in our introspective reports. (As we saw in chapter 1, mind stuff seems to be needed to be
the stuff out of which purple cows and the like are composed.) I suspect
that most people still do find the prospect of this identification utterly
unimaginable, but rather than concede that it is therefore impossible,
I want to try to stretch our imaginations some more, with yet another
fable. This one closes in somewhat on a particularly puzzling phenomenological item, the mental image, and has the virtue of being largely
a true story, somewhat simplified and embellished.

      7. SHAKEY'S MENTAL IMAGES

     In the short history of robots, Shakey, developed at Stanford Research Institute in Menlo Park, California, in the late 1960s by Nils
Nilsson, Bertram Raphael, and their colleagues, deserves legendary

=== p. 86 ===

status, not because he did anything particularly well, or was a particularly realistic simulation of any feature of human psychology, but
because in his alien way he opened up some possibilities of thought
and closed down others (Raphael, 1976; Nilsson, 1984). He was the sort
of robot a philosopher could admire, a sort of rolling argument.

     Shakey was a box on wheels with a television eye, and instead of
carrying his brain around with him, he was linked to it (a large stationary computer back in those days) by radio. Shakey lived indoors
in a few rooms in which the only other objects were a few boxes,
pyramids, ramps, and platforms, carefully colored and lit to make "vision" easier for Shakey. One could communicate with Shakey by typing
messages at a terminal attached to his computer brain, in a severely
restricted vocabulary of semi-English, "PUSH THE BOX OFF THE PLATFORM" would send Shakey out, finding the box, locating a ramp, pushing the ramp into position, rolling up the ramp onto the platform, and
pushing the box off.

=== p. 87 ===

     Now how did Shakey do this? Was there, perhaps, a human midget
inside Shakey, looking at a TV screen and pushing control buttons?
Such a single, smart homunculus would be one — cheating — way of
doing it. Another way would be by locating a human controller outside
Shakey, in radio remote control. This would be the Cartesian solution,
with the transmitter/receiver in Shakey playing the role of the pineal
gland, and radio signals being the nonmiraculous stand-tn for Des-cartes's nonphysical soul-messages. The emptiness of these "solutions"
is obvious; but what could a nonempty solution be? It may seem inconceivable at first — or at least unimaginably complex — but it is just
such obstacles to imagination we need to confront and overcome. It
turns out to be easier than you may have supposed to imagine how
Shakey performed his deeds without the help of a homo ex machina.
     How, in particular, did Shakey distinguish boxes from pyramids
with the aid of his television eye? The answer, in outline, was readily
apparent to observers, who could watch the process happen on a computer monitor. A single frame of grainy television, an image of a box,
say, would appear on the monitor; the image would then be purified
and rectified and sharpened in various ways, and then, marvelously,
the boundaries of the box would be outlined in white — and the entire
image turned into a line drawing (Figure 4.3, page 88).
     Then Shakey would analyze the line drawing; each vertex was
identifiable as either an L or a T or an X or an arrow or a Y. if a Y
vertex was discovered, the object had to be a box, not a pyramid; from
no vantage point would a pyramid project a Y vertex.

                                               Arrow

=== p. 88 ===

    1                       •
    h   ~—--

/                                       •

I              .   .
                       Of
         r_

                                    •

                                f

=== p. 89 ===

     That is something of an oversimplification, but it illustrates the
general principles relied upon; Shakey had a "line semantics" program
for wielding such general rules to determine the category of the object
whose image was on the monitor. Watching the monitor, observers
might be expected to suffer a sudden dizziness when it eventually
occurred to them that there was something strange going on: They were
watching a process of image transformation on a monitor, but S ha key
wasn't looking at it. Moreover, Shakey wasn't looking at any other
monitor on which the same images were being transformed and analyzed. There were no other monitors in the hardware, and for that matter
the monitor they were watching could be turned off or unplugged without detriment to Shakey's processes of perceptual analysis. Was this
monitor some kind of fraud? For whose benefit was it? Only for the
observers. What relation, then, did the events they saw on the monitor
bear to the events going on inside Shakey?
       The monitor was for the observers, but the idea of the monitor
was also for the designers of Shakey. Consider the almost unimaginable
task they faced: How on earth could you take the output from a simple
television camera and somehow extract from it reliable box-identifications? Of all the kazillions of possible frames the camera could send
 to the computer, a tiny subset of them are pictures of boxes; each frame
 consists simply of an array of black and white cells or pixels, offs and
 ons, zeros and ones. How could a program be written that would identify all and only the frames that were pictures of boxes? Suppose, to
 oversimplify, the retina of the camera was a grid of 10,000 pixels, 100
 by 100. Then each frame would be one of the possible sequences of
 10,000 zeroes and ones. What patterns in the zeroes and ones would
 line up reliably with the presence of boxes?
       To begin with, think of placing all those zeros and ones in an
 array, actually reproducing the camera image in space, as in the array
 of pixels visible on the monitor. Number the pixels in each row from
 left to right, like words on a page (and unlike commercial television.
 which does a zigzag scan). Notice, then, that dark regions are mainly
 composed of zeroes and light regions of ones. Moreover, a vertical
 boundary between a dark region to the left and a light region to the
 right can be given a simple description in terms of the sequence of
 zeroes and ones: a sequence of mostly zeroes up to pixel number n,
 followed by a sequence of mostly ones, followed exactly 100 digits
 later (in the next line) by another sequence of mostly zeroes lip to pixel
 n + 100, followed by mostly ones, and so forth, in multiples of 100.
      A program that would hunt for such periodicities in the stream

=== p. 90 ===

         06                   aNy

     L00000L00000L00000L0000 LOL LOLL L LI LOLL L L L L LOLL L
     LOLOLII0000000I000000L0000LOO ILL LOt L L L LOILOL
     LOOL0000000LOI0000000LO L L L LOLOL LOLOL L L L L LOLIL        I

     L0000000000L00000L00000 LOLOL L L L L LI L L LOLL L ILL OL
     L0000000L0000000L00000LO LOLOL L L LOLL L L L L L L LOLL L
     L0000000000L00000000000 L L L L LOLL L L L L L L L LOLL L L L L
     L0000000000000L00000000 L LOLL L L L L LI L L L LL LL L L I. L L
     L0000000L00000000000000 L L L L L L LOLL L L L L L L L L L L L L L
     LOL000000000000L00000000 L L L L L L L L L L L LOLL L L L L L L L
     OLI.LLLLLLLLOLLLLLLLLLLLL00000000000000000L0000
     LOOL0000000000000000000 L LOLL L L L L L L L L L L L LL L L L L L
     L000000000000000L000000 L L L L L L L L LOLL L L L L L L L L L L L
                                                    t1'
jo                        WOIJ at.p eiamea                aq ajqe     aieaoi qans
                           ,puno; qans B Anpunoq                  aq pau.Irn OW! e
1B3!PaA                 auq Sq                                  jo soo.ioz 1MM sauo PUB
aaiA 'P5104 OS                   SU!tpouios °111 000tt000 s.iflaaO                      £1949
parpunq SUOII!SOd U! aqi aauanbas
     L0000000000000000000000 0000000000000000000000L
     L0000000000000000000000 L 0000000000000000000000
     L0000000000000000000000 L 0000000000000000000000
     L0000000000000000000000 L 0000000000000000000000
     L0000000000000000000000 L 0000000000000000000000
     L0000000000000000000000 L 0000000000000000000000
     L0000000000000000000000 L 0000000000000000000000
     L0000000000000000000000 L 0000000000000000000000
     L0000000000000000000000 L 0000000000000000000000
     L0000000000000000000000 L 0000000000000000000000
     L0000000000000000000000 L 0000000000000000000000
     L0000000000000000000000 L 0000000000000000000000
                                                    SP

        v tInuoz!.Ioq                     Aiepunoq              se Asea   :wds e aaejd
     aqi aauanbas                  e £unij sooiazjo           paoqaa '001 '003 pue ooc
spthp                          a £Lxn[ jo sauo

     L000 L00000000 L000000000L00000000000 00000000000
     L0000000000 LO L00000000000000 L00000000000000000
     L00000000 L00000000000 L0000000000000 OL000000000
     L0000 L000000000000000L00000000000 L0000000 00000
     000000000 L 00000000000000 L 000000000000000000000
     L000000000000000000 L000000000 00000000000000000
     L L L L L L L L LOLL L L L L L L L L L L L L LOLL L L L L L L L L L L L LOOL L L L
     L L L L                       LOLL L L L L L L L L L L L L L L LOLL L L L L L L L L L
               L L L L L L L L L L L
     L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L LOLL L L L L L L L L L L L L L LOLL L L L

     LOL L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L
      L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L LOL
     L L L L L L L   LOLL L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L LOLL L L L L L L L L L L
                                                    9t

=== p. 91 ===

       Sloping boundaries are only a little trickier; the program must
look for a progression in the sequence. Once all the boundaries are
located and drawn in white, the line drawing is complete, and the next,
more sophisticated, step takes over: "templates" are "placed" on bits
of the line segment so that the vertices can be identified. Once the
vertices have been identified, it is a straightforward matter to use the
line semantics program to categorize the object in the image — it might
in some cases be as simple a task as looking for a single Y vertex.
       Several features of this process are important to us. First, each
subprocess is "stupid" and mechanical. That is, no part of the computer
has to understand what it is doing or why, and there is no mystery
about how each of the steps is mechanically done. Nevertheless, the
clever organization of these stupid, mechanical processes yields a device that takes the place of a knowledgeable observer. (Put the whole
vision system in a "black box" whose task is to "tell Shakey what he
needs to know" about what is in front of it, based on TV frames that
enter as input. Initially we might be inclined to think the only way to
do this would be to put a little man in the black box, watching a screen.
We now see a way this homunculus, with his limited job, can be replaced by a machine.)
       Once we see how it is done, we can see that while the process is
strongly analogous to a process of actually looking at (and drawing and
erasing) black and white dots on a screen, the actual location in the
computer of the individual operations of changing zeroes to ones and
vice versa doesn't matter, so long as the numbers that are the temporary
"addresses" of the individual digits code the information about which
pixels are next to which. Suppose we turn off the monitor. Then even
though there is (or need be) no actual two-dimensional image locatable
 in the space inside the computer (say, as a "pattern of excitation in the
hardware"), the operations are homomorphic (parallel) to the events
we were watching on the monitor. Those events were genuinely imagistic: a two-dimensional surface of excited phosphor dots forming a
shape of a particular size, color, location, and orientation. So in one
strict sense, Shakey does not detect boxes by a series of image transformations; the last real image in the process is the one that is focused
 on the receptive field of the camera. In another strict but metaphorical
 sense, Shakey does detect boxes by a series of image transformations —
 the process just described, which turns light-dark boundaries into a
 line drawing and then categorizes vertices. The fact that this strict sense
 is nevertheless metaphorical can be brought out by noting that there
 are a variety of properties one would expect any real images to have

=== p. 92 ===

that the "images" transformed by Shakey lack: They have no color, no
size, no orientation. (We could make a nice riddle out of such an image:
I'm thinking of an image that is neither larger nor smaller than the
Mona Lisa, is neither in color nor in black and white, and faces in no
compass direction. What is it?)
      The process Shakey used to extract information about objects from
the light in its environment was hardly at all like the processes of human
vision, and probably not like the visual processes of any creature. But
we may ignore this for the moment, in order to see a rather abstract
possibility about how the mental images that human subjects report
might be discovered in the brain. The account of Shakey's vision system
was oversimplified to permit the basic theoretical points to emerge
vividly. Now we're going to embark on some science fiction to make
another point: Suppose we were to cross Shakey with another famous
character in artificial intelligence, Terry Winograd's (1972) SHRDLU,
who manipulated (imaginary) blocks and then answered questions
about what it was doing and why. SHRLDU's answers were mainly
"canned" — stored ready-made sentences and sentence-templates that
Winograd had composed. The point of SHRDLU was to explore abstractly some of the information-handling tasks faced by any interlocutor, not to model human speech production realistically, and this is
in the spirit of our thought experiment. (In chapter 8 we will look at
more realistic models of speech production.) An interchange with our
new version of Shakey, redesigned to include a more sophisticated
repertoire of verbal actions, might go like this:
     Why did you move the ramp?
     SO I COULD ROLL UP ON THE PLATFORM.
    And why did you want to do that?
    TO PUSH THE BOX OFF.
    And why did you want to do that?
    BECAUSE YOU TOLD ME TO.

But suppose we then asked Shakey:
    How do you tell the boxes from the pyramids?
     What should we design Shakey to "say" in reply? Here are three
possibilities:
    (1)   I scan each 10,000-digit-long sequence of Os and is from my
          camera, looking for certain patterns of sequences, such as
          blahblahblah (a very long answer if we let Shakey go into the
          details).

=== p. 93 ===

     (2) 1 find the light-dark boundaries and draw white lines around
         them in my mind's eye; then I look at the vertices; if I find a
         Y vertex, for instance, I know I have a box.
     (3) I don't know; some things just look boxy. It just comes to me.
         It's by intuition.

Which is the right sort of thing for Shakey to say? Each answer is true
in its way; they are descriptions of the information processing at different depths or grain levels. Which answer we design Shakey to be
able to give is largely a matter of deciding how much access Shakey's
expressive capacity (his SHRDLU black box) should have to his perceptual processes. Perhaps there would be good reasons of engineering
to deny deep (detailed, time-consuming) access to the intermediate
analysis processes. But whatever self-descriptive capacities we endow
Shakey with, there will be a limit to the depth and detail of his expressible "knowledge" of what is going on in him, what he is doing.
If the best answer he can give is (3), then he is in the same position
with regard to the question of how he tells pyramids from boxes that
we are in when asked how we tell the word "sun" from the word
"shun"; we don't know how we do it; one sounds like "sun" and the
other like "shun" — that's the best we can do. And if Shakey is designed
to respond with (2), there will still be other questions he cannot answer,
such as "How do you draw white lines on your mental images?" or
"How do you identify a vertex as an arrow?"
      Suppose we design Shakey to have type-(2) access to his perceptual analysis processes; when we ask him how he does it, he tells us
of the image-transforming he does. Unbeknownst to him, we unplug
the monitor. Are we then entitled to tell him that we know better? He
isn't really processing images, though he thinks he is? (He says he is,
and so, following the heterophenomenological strategy, we interpret
this as an expression of his belief.) if he were a realistic simulation of
a person, he might well retort that we were in no position to tell him
what was going on in his own mind! He knew what he was doing, what
he was really doing! If he were more sophisticated, he might grant that
what he was doing might be only allegorically describable as image
 processing — though he felt overwhelmingly inclined so to describe
 what was happening. In this case we would be able to tell him that his
 metaphorical way of putting it was entirely apt.
       If we were more diabolical, on the other hand, we could rig Shakey
 to have entirely spurious ways of talking about what he was doing. We
 could design him to want to say things about what was going on in

=== p. 94 ===

 him that bore no regular relationship to what was actually going on ("I
 use my TV input to drive an internal chisel, which hews a three-dimensional shape out of a block of mental clay. Then if my homunculus can sit on it, it's a box; if he falls off, it's a pyramid.") There
 would be no truth-preserving interpretation of this report; Shakey would
 just be confabulating — making up a story without "realizing" it.
       And this possibility, in us, shows why we have to go to the round..
 about trouble of treating heterophenomenology as analogous to the
 interpretation of fiction. As we have already seen, there are circumstances in which people are just wrong about what they are doing and
 how they are doing it. It is not that they lie in the experimental situation,
 but that they confabulate; they fill in the gaps, guess, speculate, mistake
 theorizing for observing. The relation between what they say and whatever it is that drives them to say what they say could hardly be more
 obscure, both to us heterophenomenologists on the outside and to the
 subjects themselves. They don't have any way of "seeing" (with an
 inner eye, presumably) the processes that govern their assertions, but
 that doesn't stop them from having heartfelt opinions to express.
       To sum up, subjects are unwitting creators of fiction, but to say
that they are unwitting is to grant that what they say is, or can be, an
account of exactly how it seems to them. They tell us what it is like to
them to solve the problem, make the decision, recognize the object.
Because they are sincere (apparently), we grant that that must be what
it is like to them, but then it follows that what it is like to them is at
best an uncertain guide to what is going on in them. Sometimes, the
unwitting fictions we subjects create can be shown to be true after all,
if we allow for some metaphorical slack as we did with Shakey's answer
in style (2). For instance, recent research on imagery by cognitive psychologists shows that our introspective claims about the mental images
we enjoy (whether of purple cows or pyramids) are not utterly false
(Shepard and Cooper, 1982; Kosslyn, 1980; Kosslyn, Holtzman, Gaz-zaniga, and Farah, 1985). This will be discussed in more detail in
chapter 10, and we will see how our introspective reports of imagery
can be interpreted so they come out true. Like the earthly Feenoman,
however, who turns out not to be able to fly or be in two places at once,
the actual things we find in the brain to identih' as the mental images
will not have all the wonderful properties subjects have confidently
endowed their images with. Shakey's "images" provide an example of
how something that really wasn't an image at all could be the very
thing someone was talking about under the guise of an image. While
the processes in the brain underlying human imagery are probably not

=== p. 95 ===

very much like Shakey's processes, we have opened up a space of
possibilities that was otherwise hard to imagine.

     8. THE NEUTRALITY OF HETEROPHENOMENOLOGY

      At the outset of this chapter I promised to describe a method, the
heterophenomenological method, that was neutral with regard to the
debates about subjective versus objective approaches to phenomenology, and about the physical or nonphysical reality of phenomenological
items. Let's review the method to see that this is so.
      First, what about the zombie problem? Very simply, heterophe-nomenology by itself cannot distinguish between zombies and real,
conscious people, and hence does not claim to solve the zombie problem or dismiss it. Ex hypothesi, zombies behave Just like real people,
and since heterophenomenology is a way of interpreting behavior (including the internal behavior of brains, etc.), it will arrive at exactly
the same heterophenomenological world for Zoe and for Zombie-Zoe,
her unconscious twin. Zombies have a heterophenomenological world,
but that just means that when theorists go to interpret them, they succeed at exactly the same task, using exactly the same means, as we use
to interpret our friends. Of course, as noted before, some of our friends
may be zombies. (It's hard for me to keep a straight face through all
this, but since some very serious philosophers take the zombie problem
seriously, I feel obliged to reciprocate.)
       There is surely nothing wrong, nothing nonneutral, in granting
zombies a heterophenomenological world, since it grants so little. This
is the metaphysical minimalism of heterophenomenology. The method
describes a world, the subject's heterophenomenological world, in
which are found various objects (intentional objects, in the jargon of
philosophy), and in which various things happen to these objects. If
someone asks: "What are those objects, and what are they made of?"
the answer might be "Nothing!" What is Mr. Pickwick made of? Nothing. Mr. Pickwick is a fictional object, and so are the objects described,
 named, mentioned by the heterophenomenologist.
        — 'But isn't it embarrassing to admit, as a theorist, that you are
 talking about fictional entities — things that don't exist?" Not at all.
 Literary theorists do valuable, honest intellectual work describing fictional entities, and so do anthropologists who study the gods and
 witches of various cultures. So indeed do physicists, who, if asked
 what a center of gravity was made of, would say, "Nothing!" Hetero-phenomenological objects are, like centers of gravity or the Equator,

=== p. 96 ===

 abstracta, not concreta (Dennett, 1987a, 1991a). They are not idle fantasies but hardworking theorists' fictions. Moreover, unlike centers of
 gravity, the way is left open to trade them in for concreta if progress
 in empirical science warrants it.
       There are two ways of studying Noah's Flood: You can assume
that it is sheer myth but still an eminently studiable myth, or you can
ask whether some actual meteorological or geological catastrophe lies
behind it. Both investigations can be scientific, but the first is less
speculative, If you want to speculate along the second lines, the first
thing you should do is conduct a careful investigation along the first
lines to gather what hints there are. Similarly, if you want to study how
(or even if) phenomenological items are really events in the brain, the
first thing you should do is a careful heterophenomenological catalogue
of the objects. This risks offending the subjects (in the same way anthropologists studying Feenoman risk offending their informants), but
 it is the only way to avoid the battle of "intuitions" that otherwise
 passes for phenomenology.
        Still, what of the objection that heterophenomenology, by starting
out from the third-person point of view, leaves the real problems of
consciousness untouched? Nagel, as we saw, insists on this, and so
does the philosopher John Searle, who has explicitly warned against
my approach: "Remember," he admonishes, "in these discussions, always insist on the first person point of view. The first step in the
operationalist sleight of hand occurs when we try to figure out how we
would know what it would be like for others" (Searle, 1980, p. 451).
But this is not what happens. Notice that when you are put in the
heterophenomenologist's clutches, you get the last word. You get to
edit, revise, and disavow ad lib, and so long as you avoid presumptuous
theorizing about the causes or the metaphysical status of the items you
report, whatever you insist upon is granted constitutive authority to
determine what happens in your heterophenomenological world.
You're the novelist, and what you say goes. What more could you want?
       If you want us to believe everything you say about your phenomenology, you are asking not just to be taken seriously but to be granted
papal infallibility, and that is asking too much. You are not authoritative
about what is happening in you, but only about what seems to be
happening in you, and we are giving you total, dictatorial authority
over the account of how it seems to you, about what it is like to be you.
And if you complain that some parts of how it seems to you are ineffable,
we heterophenomenologists will grant that too. What better grounds
could we have for believing that you are unable to describe something

=== p. 97 ===

than that (1) you don't describe it, and (2) confess that you cannot? Of
course you might be lying, but we'll give you the benefit of the doubt.
If you retort, °I'm not just saying that I can't describe it; I'm saying it's
indescribable!" we heterophenomenologists will note that at least you
can't describe it now, and since you're the only one in a position to
describe it, it is at this time indescribable. Later, perhaps, you will
come to be able to describe it, but of course at that time it will be
something different, something describable.
     When I announce that the objects of heterophenomenology are
theorist's fictions, you may be tempted (many are, I find) to pounce on
this and say,
     That's just what distinguishes the objects of real phenomenology
     from the objects of heterophenomenology. My autophenomolog-ical objects aren't fictional objects — they're perfectly real, though
     I haven't a clue what to say they are made of. When I tell you,
     sincerely, that I am imagining a purple cow, I am not just unconsciously producing a word-string to that effect (like Shakey), cunningly contrived to coincide with some faintly analogous physical
     happening in my brain; I am consciously and deliberately reporting the existence of something that is really there! It is no
     mere theorist's fiction to me!
     Reflect cautiously on this speech. You are not just unconsciously
producing a word-string you say. Well, you are unconsciously producing a word-string; you haven't a clue to how you do that, or to what
goes into its production. But, you insist, you are not just doing that;
you know why you're doing it; you understand the word-string, and
mean it. I agree. That's why what you say works so well to constitute
a heterophenomenological world. If you were just parroting words more
or less at random, the odds against the sequence of words yielding such
an interpretation would be astronomical. Surely there is a good explanation of how and why you say what you do, an explanation that
accounts for the difference between just saying something and saying
it and meaning it, but you don't have that explanation yet. At least not
all of it. (In chapter 8 we will explore this issue.) Probably you are
talking about something real, at least most of the time. Let us see if we
can find out what it is.
      These reassurances are not enough for some people. Some people
 just won't play by these rules. Some devoutly religious people, for
 instance, take offense when interlocutors so much as hint that there
 might be some alternative true religion. These people do not view

=== p. 98 ===

  agnosticism as neutrality, but as an affront, because one of the tenets
  of their creed is that disbelief in it is itself sinful. People who
                                                                      believe
    this way are entitled to their belief, and entitled (if that is the right
   word) to the hurt feelings they suffer when they encounter skeptics or
   agnostics, but unless they can master the anxiety they feel when they
   learn that someone does not (yet) believe what they say, they rule
   themselves out of academic inquiry.
         In this chapter we have developed a neutral method for investigating and describing phenomenology. It involves extracting and purifying texts from (apparently) speaking subjects, and using those texts
   to generate a theorist's fiction, the subject's heterophenomenological
   world. This fictional world is populated with all the images, events,
  sounds, smells, hunches, presentiments, and feelings that the subject
  (apparently) sincerely believes to exist in his or her (or its) stream of
  consciousness. Maximally extended, it is a neutral portrayal of exactly
  what it is like to be that subject — in the subject's own terms, given
  the best interpretation we can muster.
         Having extracted such a heterophenomenology, theorists can then
  turn to the question of what might explain the existence of this het-erophenomenology in all its details. The heterophenomenology exists — just as uncontroversially as novels and other fictions exist.
  People undoubtedly do believe they have mental images, pains, perceptual experiences, and all the rest, and these facts — the facts about
  what people believe, and report when they express their beliefs — are
  phenomena any scientific theory of the mind must account for. We
  organize our data regarding these phenomena into theorist's fictions,
  "intentional objects" in heterophenomenological worlds. Then the
 question of whether items thus portrayed exist as real objects, events,
 and states in the brain — or in the soul, for that matter — is an empirical
 matter to investigate, if suitable real candidates are uncovered, we can
 identify them as the long-sought referents of the subject's terms; if not,
 we will have to explain why it seems to subjects that these items exist.
        Now that our methodological presuppositions are in place, we can
 turn to the empirical theory of consciousness itself. We will begin by
 tackling a problem about the timing and ordering of items in our streams
of consciousness. In chapter 5, I will present a first sketch of the theory
and exhibit how it handles a simple case. In chapter 6, we will see how
the theory permits us to reinterpret some much more complicated phenomena that have perplexed the theorists. Chapters 7 through 9 will
develop the theory beyond the initial sketch, warding off misinterpretations and objections, and further illustrating its strengths.

=== p. 99 ===

            PART TWO

AN EMPIRICAL THEORY
        OF THE MIND

