=== chunk: cappelen-gendler-hawthorne-2016-oxford-handbook/ch1-dever-what-is-philosophical-methodology ===
title: Dever, "What is Philosophical Methodology?"
source_pdf: docs/sources/cappelen-gendler-hawthorne-2016-oxford-handbook/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 20-43
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 3
plan_page_end: 26
extracted_pages: 23 (plan nominally 24; trailing blank trimmed)
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 3 ===

                                       Chapter 1

        W h at is Phil osophica l
             M ethodol ogy?
                                       Josh Dever

                                  1. Introduction

Philosophical methodology has been a hot topic recently. (I hear they’re devoting entire
handbooks to it!) But what is the topic? What do we talk about when we talk about philosophical methodology? The goal of this chapter is to address that metamethodological
question.1 I won’t attempt to say what good philosophical methodology is, or to answer any
first-​order methodological questions, but only to figure out what kind of thing a philosophical methodology (good or not) would be, and what kind of questions would count as methodological questions.
   A persistent ambiguity dogs any discussion of the metamethodological question of
what kind of thing philosophical methodology is, rather than (e.g.) what instances of that
type are typically or ideally realized. The question “What is philosophical methodology?”
admits of a “lower-​order” reading, on which admissible answers are the use of thought
experiments to test conceptual analyses, or understanding us and our environments in a way
conducive to human flourishing. But the same question admits of a “higher-​order” reading,
on which admissible answers are the epistemological methods that distinguish philosophy
from the natural sciences (on one side) and the humanities (on the other side), or the pursuit
of a description of reality at the most fundamental level. It is the “higher-​order” reading
that I will be primarily interested in in this chapter, but to avoid ambiguity or the need
for lengthy disambiguations, I will use “Philosophical Methodology” to pick out questions

  1 I use “meta” here in a loosely type-​t heoretic sense, so that metamethodological questions are

questions that refer to something referring to methodology, rather than merely questions that refer to
methodology. The use of the “meta”-​label is also a way of characterizing the subfield of philosophical
methodology—​it is presumably not an orthographic accident that it is often called “metaphilosophy.”
The current topic, in that terminology, is metametaphilosophy. The question of the relation between
the two occurrences of “meta” in this label is taken up in section 5.

=== p. 4 ===

of the higher order, and “philosophical methodology” to pick out questions of the lower
order.2
   It is perhaps appropriate to begin this investigation into the nature of Philosophical
Methodology with a brief description of the methodology that the investigation itself
will use.3 We’ll start by treating this as a problem in (not so) ordinary language philosophy: there is a term “philosophical methodology” at use in philosophical talk and writing, and we want to know what that term picks out. To provide a robust data pool, I’ll take
all occurrences of the word “methodological” in entries of the Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy (SEP), and see what plausible theories of Philosophical Methodology can be fitted onto the bed of that range of usage.4
   We will turn shortly to the consideration of some theories of Philosophical Methodology
on the basis of this data pool, but let’s begin by looking at a few representative usages to get
a sense for the shape and difficulty of the task. Here are five samples from the data pool,
selected (from among many other suitable candidates) to display some of the paradigm
usage types:

    1. [Aquinas] employs, through all his works, a methodological axiom: X’s nature is
       understood by understanding X’s capacities, which are understood by understanding their act[uation]s, which are understood by understanding their objects. (John
       Finnis, SEP, “Natural Law Theories”)5
    2. From this vantage point, general covariance is but the most recent refinement of the
       methodological principle of “unity of determination” governing the constitution
       of objects of physical knowledge, completing the transposition in physics from concepts of substance into functional and relational concepts. (Thomas Ryckman, SEP,
       “Early Philosophical Interpretations of General Relativity”)
    3. Is there any a priori support for “There is nothing”? One might respond with a
       methodological principle that propels the empty world to the top of the agenda. For
       instance, many feel that whoever asserts the existence of something has the burden
       of proof. (Roy Sorensen, SEP, “Nothingness”)

   2 So “What philosophical methodology should we use to determine what Philosophical

Methodology is?” is the question of what member of some type T we should use in coming to
understand the nature of type T itself. The lower-​order questions will typically be more amenable to
normative instances, because the metaphysical/​conceptual questions of the nature of the category are
less normative (which is not to say wholly non-​normative) than questions about the use of members of
the category.
     Is it also perhaps incoherent, on the grounds that we are in no position to consider a particular
methodology until we’ve determined what Methodology is? No, for familiar Meno-​t ype reasons. It
suffices that we have a recognitional capacity with respect to methods. So long as you recognize what
I give as a method, that will suffice to begin the process of determining what kind of thing you are
thereby recognizing it as being.
   4 A brief summary of the data: there are (as of 2010, when the original data was collected) 285

entries in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy that use the word “methodological.” The full list of
those entries (in the order produced by the search engine) is shown in Appendix 1 of this chapter.
   5 Bolding of “methodological” and cognates is added to quotations throughout. All other forms of

emphasis are in the original.

=== p. 5 ===

      4. Aristotle approaches his account of the nutritive soul by relying on a methodological precept which informs much of his psychological theorizing, namely that
         a capacity is individuated by its objects, so that, e.g. perception is distinguished
         from mind by being arrayed toward sensible qualities rather than intelligible forms.
         (Christopher Shields, SEP, “Aristotle’s Psychology”)
      5. Cognitive science raises many interesting methodological questions that are worthy of investigation by philosophers of science. What is the nature of representation?
         What role do computational models play in the development of cognitive theories?
         What is the relation among apparently competing accounts of mind involving symbolic processing, neural networks, and dynamical systems? What is the relation
         among the various fields of cognitive science such as psychology, linguistics, and
         neuroscience? Are psychological phenomena subject to reductionist explanations
         via neuroscience? (Paul Thagard, SEP, “Cognitive Science”)

Whatever Philosophical Methodology is, it is apparently the source of axioms, principles,
precepts, and questions. Making the bold assumption that axioms, principles, and precepts
are all the same thing, we have a short list of propositions wearing the “methodological”
honorific:

  • (A) X’s nature is understood by X’s capacities, (B) “For the physical description of the
    processes of nature no particular reference body should be distinguished above all
    others”,6 (C) Whoever asserts the existence of something has the burden of proof, (D)
    A capacity is individuated by its objects

We also have a list of questions distinguished as “methodological”, including “What role
do computational models play in the development of cognitive theories?” and “Are psychological phenomena subject to reductionist explanations via neuroscience?”.
   Even the small sample of propositions (A) through (D) shows a considerable diversity.
(D) is a straightforward proposition of metaphysics and (C) a straightforward proposition of epistemology. (A) lands either in metaphysics or in epistemology, depending on
whether “understood” is given a metaphysical (e.g. grounding) or an epistemological
(e.g. explanatory) reading. (B) is a normative claim, in which the relevant norm is something like a (non-​a lethic?) norm of theory selection. The additional methodological
questions rapidly add to the diversity. It is tempting, in order to constrain the class of the
Methodological, to hypothesize that a methodological question is not a methodological
question simply in virtue of being a question whose answer is a methodological proposition (=axiom, principle, etc.), but rather that it is somehow distinctively the question that
is methodological. At this early point in the investigation, however, it is not transparent
how to make this distinction.
   What, then, do we talk about when we talk about philosophical methodology? I think
even this small sample of the usage suffices to show that there’s no obvious and straightforward fitting of an account of Philosophical Methodology onto the way in which

    The “principle of the unity of determination”, from Cassirer (1921), as discussed in Ryckman
(2005).

=== p. 6 ===

philosophers use “methodological” talk.7 In the remainder of this investigation I’ll set out
a sequence of attempted fittings, which will be tested against a wider range of the data as we
proceed. More or less each attempt will try to respond to the shortcomings of the previous
attempt, so if all goes well there will be some accumulation of virtues along the way.
   It’s a long journey through the sequence of attempts, though, so I’ll start with a math
problem to mull over if you weary of Methodological hypotheses:
   The Puzzle: Springfield is a town of 1,000 people, whose residents have a mania for forming clubs. The residents of Springfield place two requirements on their clubs:

    1. Each club must have an odd number of members.
    2. Any two distinct clubs must have an even number (possibly 0) of members in
       common.

  Determine (with proof) the largest number of clubs that the residents of Springfield
can form.

                2. Hypothesis #1: Eliminativism

Let’s begin with the simplest view: there’s nothing at all meant by “methodological” in philosophical contexts. It can simply be globally eliminated without any content being lost.8 To
see why one might be tempted by Eliminativism, consider claims such as:

  • A simple scientific example can be found in the rationale behind the sensible methodological adage that “correlation does not imply causation.” (Kyle Stanford, SEP,
    “Underdetermination of Scientific Theory”)
  • There is, then, at the very least, a methodological issue separating DRT from non-​
    representational frameworks: a non-​representational framework is defined with a
    natural criterion for identity of meaning of two sentences in mind, and this criterion is
    related to the information conveyed by those sentences. But in a representational framework like DRT the representations themselves provide the only criterion for judging
    identity of meaning. So is representationalism only methodological, a mere convenience? (Bart Geurts and David Beaver, SEP, “Discourse Representation Theory”)

     One hypothesis is that the subfield of “Philosophical Methodology” is not, in fact, beholden to
how philosophers at large use the “methodological” vocabulary, but rather only to how philosophers
engaged in the “Philosophical Methodology’ subfield use the “methodological” vocabulary. (There is
a worry here about how to identify the relevant subfield, but we might get started by ostension, or
by characterizing a distinctive “meta” syntactic profile that distinguishes talk about Philosophical
Methodology in the relevant sense.) I won’t pursue this hypothesis here, but plausibly it would lead (for
reasons that are alluded to in section 4) to something similar to what I call “Epistemologism” about
Philosophical Methodology.
   8 Plausibly Eliminativism should be the null hypothesis for all philosophical vocabulary.

=== p. 7 ===

Now re-​read those claims deleting the occurrences of “methodological.”9 How much is lost
by taking “causation does not imply correlation” to be merely an adage, without specifying
that it is a methodological adage, or by taking the difference in criterion for the identity of
meaning to be an issue separating representational from non-​representational semantic
frameworks, without specifying that it is a methodological issue?
   Or, to venture outside the bounds of the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, consider
Bonevac, Dever, and Sosa (2011)’s “First Methodological Observation”:

  • Counterexamples must be deployed as counterexamples to specific proposals. The
    example of a glass packed in Styrofoam can perhaps show that fragile cannot be analyzed as would break if struck, but it shows nothing about a proposed analysis of fragile
    as would break if struck when unwrapped, and certainly shows nothing about any proposed analysis of a different dispositional term, such as irascible.

Again, it’s not clear that anything is gained by calling this a methodological observation,
rather than just an observation, beyond a certain weightiness of style.10
   Eliminativism about Philosophical Methodology can’t be taken too seriously as a proposal. Methodological talk is widespread throughout philosophy, and Eliminativism
would require a rather stark error theory about our stance toward our own philosophical
practice. What does emerge from the consideration of Eliminativism is that, while there
is surely a robust and substantive notion of Philosophical Methodology embedded in our
practice, it also looks undeniable that philosophical rhetoric has an inclination toward
“methodological creep”—​there is a temptation to achieve gravitas by calling points
methodological.11 It’s thus at least a minor desideratum for a theory of Philosophical
Methodology that it explain why “methodological” is, as it were, a high status word (at
least among philosophers).

       3. Hypothesis #2: Working-​Hypothesism

Consider the use of “methodological” language in the discussion of methodological reduc-tionism in Ingo Brigandt and Alan Love’s SEP entry on reductionism in biology:

  • Methodological reduction is the idea that biological systems are most fruitfully investigated at the lowest possible level, and that experimental studies should be aimed at
    uncovering molecular and biochemical causes. A common characterization of this

      And making appropriate syntactic adjustments.
      A certain amount of uncomfortable autobiographical reflection was involved in the writing of
this piece, as will manifest again in this chapter.
   11 Of course, the apparent eliminability of “methodological” from any particular bit of

philosophical text is inadequate to determine that that usage is rhetorical, rather than substantive.
Even if nothing in the content of a given text requires or determines a non-​vacuous meaning
of “methodological”, the text can still be exploiting a substantive conception of Philosophical
Methodology determined by other parts of the practice.

=== p. 8 ===

     type of strategy is what has been termed “decomposition and localization” (Bechtel
     and Richardson 1993). While methodological reductionism is often motivated by the
     presumption of ontological reduction, this procedural recommendation does not follow directly from it. (Brigandt and Love, SEP, “Reductionism in Biology”)

Eliminitivism is not a plausible analysis of this use of “methodological”—​because methodological reductionism is being contrasted with other forms of reductionism, some substantive theory of what makes a form of reductionism peculiarly methodological is needed.
    Here’s a crude diagnosis: we focus on Brigandt and Love’s claim that methodological
reductionism is a technique for securing fruitful biological theorizing by, in effect, acting as
if (biological) reductionism is true, whether or not it is in fact true. We see a similar idea in
Zoltán Szabό’s SEP article on compositionality. Here, under the subsection “Methodology”,
Szabό says:

  • By far the most popular reason for believing in compositionality is that it works.
    Linguists have adopted various versions of the principle as a working hypothesis and
    developed semantic theories on their basis. These theories have provided intuitively
    satisfactory explanations for certain data, such as the validity or invalidity of certain
    inferences or for various sorts of contrasts between certain minimal pairs. (Szabό,
    SEP, “Compositionality”)

Like Brigandt and Love, Szabό characterizes a principle as methodological on the grounds
that guiding theorizing by it produces better final theories. (Szabό differs from Brigandt
and Love by characterizing the theoretical fruitfulness of the principle as something people take as a reason for belief in the principle, although he proceeds to say that “despite its
popularity, this is not a very good reason to believe in compositionality”, and most of his
methodological discussion is independent of the question of outright belief in the methodological principle.)
   Philosophical Methodology is, on this conception, the task of identifying “working
hypotheses”, tentative assumptions, and norms of investigation that lead to good theorizing. Working hypotheses in the relevant sense can be claims that we suspect, but don’t yet
know, to be true, such as the principle of compositionality in semantic theorizing. Here the
pursuit of compositional meaning theories is perhaps fruitful in part because (we suspect)
the one true semantic theory is in fact compositional, so our working hypothesis directs
us to the proper part of logical space. But the compositional pursuit can also be fruitful
because it helps us avoid certain kinds of mistakes by lowering the complexity of the theory,
or because it makes it easier for us to integrate modular theories for different semantic phenomena. Working hypotheses can also be claims that are (we suspect) false, such as a claim
of ontological reductionism in biology. In adopting reductionism as a working hypothesis,
we perhaps obtain better theories, not because the biological systems are genuinely reductive, but rather because there are de facto widespread explanatory relations, not sufficient
for reductionism, from the microphenomena to the macrophenomena.
   The relevant tentative assumptions can, it would appear, be arbitrarily diverse in their
content—​they need not be, for example, exclusively “deep” metaphysical or epistemological principles. “Working hypotheses” in this sense can also cover simple advice on

=== p. 9 ===

how to do good philosophical theorizing, as in Bonevac, Dever, and Sosa (2011)’s “Third
Methodological Observation”:

  • Philosophical discussions of conditionals should not assume that the logical options
    are limited to the material condition, the C. I. Lewis strict conditional, and the Lewis/​
    Stalnaker variably strict counterfactual conditional.12

But if Philosophical Methodology amounts simply to nuggets of advice on how to get
good philosophy done, there is a worry about how to carve out a philosophically interesting enterprise under the “Philosophical Methodology” banner, rather than a glorified
anthology of avuncular wisdom. There is no clear stopping point on the spectrum from
“assume until forced to do otherwise that biological phenomena have reductive biochemical explanations” to “try to make your semantic theories compositional, unless that gets
hopelessly messy”, to “consider a wide range of logical options”, to “don’t do philosophy
while drunk”.13

               4. Hypothesis #3: Epistemologism

Many instances of “methodological” talk focus on epistemological questions of how we
achieve knowledge through philosophical activity. Consider some representative samples:

  • However it is often thought that knowledge of animal minds—​what Allen & Bekoff
    (1997) refer to as “the other species of mind problem” and Prinz (2005) calls “The Who
    Problem”—​presents special methodological difficulties because we cannot interrogate animals directly about their experiences (but see Sober 2000 for discussion of
    tractability within an evolutionary framework, and Farah 2008 for a neuroscientist’s perspective). Although there have been attempts to teach human-​like languages
    to members of other species, none has reached a level of conversational ability that
    would solve this problem directly (see Anderson 2004 for a review). (Colin Allen, SEP,
    “Animal Consciousness”)
  • Ironically, the identification of empathy and understanding and the associated claim
    that empathy is the sole and unique method of the human sciences also facilitated the
    decline of the empathy concept and its almost utter disregard by philosophers of the
    human and social sciences later on, in both the analytic and continental/​hermeneutic
    traditions of philosophy. Within both traditions, proponents of empathy were—​for
    very different reasons—​generally seen as advocating an epistemically naïve and insufficiently broad conception of the methodological proceedings in the human sciences.
    As a result, most philosophers of the human and social sciences maintained their distance from the idea that empathy is central for our understanding of other minds and
    mental phenomena. (Karsten Stueber, SEP, “Empathy”)

           A certain amount of uncomfortable autobiographical reflection is reflected here also.
           Or “don’t do philosophy while sober”, if that’s your preference. I’m not here to judge.

=== p. 10 ===

  • Informed by his reading of Schleiermacher, Droysen, and Dilthey, Martin Heidegger’s
    Sein und Zeit (1927) completely transformed the discipline of hermeneutics. In
    Heidegger’s view, hermeneutics is not a matter of understanding linguistic communication. Nor is it about providing a methodological basis for the human sciences.
    (Bjørn Ramberg and Kristin Gjesdal, SEP, “Hermeneutics”)

The difficulties created by animal minds are specifically methodological difficulties because
they are epistemological difficulties—​t he problems here are not, for example, problems in
accounting for the metaphysics of animal minds, but for our knowledge of them. Similarly,
empathy is a methodological issue because it is (in context) an epistemic tool for reaching
conclusions in the human sciences. The general hypothesis, then, is that Philosophical
Methodology is the study of the means by which we come to achieve knowledge14 in
philosophy.
   On the assumption that what we are trying to do when we do philosophy is to come to
know various (philosophical) truths about the world, Epistemologism about Philosophical
Methodology sweeps in the “working hypothesis” view as a special case. Methods as working hypotheses are tools to help us do philosophy better, which then translates into tools for
achieving knowledge. But the “methodological tidbits” considered in section 3 will represent ad hoc tinkering about the edges of the problem, while the central topic will be a thorough characterization of our epistemic relation to philosophical claims.
   Epistemologism about Philosophical Methodology encompasses much of the recent
work that goes under the specific banner of “philosophical methodology.” We can distinguish two classes of issues that emerge in Epistemologist Philosophical Methodology.
There are descriptive issues, centering on a specification of the epistemic methods that
are conducive to philosophical knowledge. And there are normative issues, centering on
the question of why the methods specified when addressing the descriptive question are the
right methods to use.15
   Recent discussion of the descriptive issues has revolved around renewed interest in characterizing philosophical investigation. One persistent topic has been the role of thought
experiments as a tool for testing philosophical theses. The descriptive questions here are
numerous. We need to know what kind of philosophical thesis can be tested by thought
experiments (only necessary theses?), what kinds of things thought experiments are (for
example, what the content of a thought experiment is), whether thought experiments are a
global epistemic device across philosophy or whether their application is limited to specific
subdomains of philosophy, whether the reactions of all subjects to thought experiments are

     Or justification, or etc. We needn’t fuss about the precise epistemological category here.
     The labeling here is tricky, because the epistemic methods being enumerated and described in
addressing the descriptive question are themselves normative methods, or at least intimately related to
normative claims. Answering the descriptive question will lead us to say, for example, that intuitions
justify philosophical claims, or that experimental methods ought to be used to check judgments on
thought experiments, or that good theorizing is done through conceptual analysis. Answering the
normative question leads us to say that intuitions justify because intellectual seemings, like perceptual
seemings, grant default entitlement, or that conceptual analysis grounds apparent synthetic a priori
knowledge via our ability to create truth through stipulation. We might equally well call the two
categories the normative and the metanormative.

=== p. 11 ===

equally valid or whether successful/​epistemically weighty evaluation of a thought experiment requires specific skills or expertise, whether evaluation of a thought experiment is
underwritten by specific epistemic faculties such as intuition or a generic capacity for the
evaluation of counterfactuals, and so on.
    More generally, the descriptive issues in Epistemologist Philosophical Methodology
tend to blend seamlessly into general epistemological questions, especially in the epistemology of a priori knowledge. Since many of the propositions we want to assess in philosophy appear to be either a priori true or a priori false (although the extent of the involvement
of a prioricity in philosophical practice is another topic in Epistemologist Philosophical
Methodology), describing the epistemic methods of philosophy will largely involve
describing the methods of achieving a priori knowledge. Questions about the role of intuitions, deductive reasoning, and conceptual analysis all reside in this aspect of the topic.16
    The normative issues in Epistemologist Philosophical Methodology then flow from the
descriptive issues. If intuitions play a crucial role in our philosophical method, what could
the epistemology of intuitions be, such that they could be a source of knowledge? If conceptual analysis underwrites our philosophical knowledge, how does conceptual mastery
translate into justification for analytic truths? And so on.
    There is undeniably a rich and robust philosophical enterprise being described by
Epistemologist Philosophical Methodology. It is, however, unclear whether that enterprise
is in any way distinct from epistemology tout court. The worry here is twofold. First, it is an
open question whether there is anything distinctively philosophical in philosophical methodology, taken in this epistemological sense. Maybe the ways of coming to know philosophical truths are different from the ways of coming to know non-​philosophical truths (either
because some general ways of knowing are not applicable in the philosophical domain,
or because some distinctively philosophical ways of knowing are not applicable outside
philosophy). But certainly an examination of the actual practice of philosophers does not
give grounds for optimism about this kind of philosophical exceptionalism. Actual philosophical practice involves pretty much every imaginable epistemic method: arguments
deductive and inductive, experimentation, opinion survey, reflective equilibrium, critical
self-​examination, phenomenological introspection, textual exigesis and eisigesis, and so
on. If there is nothing distinctively philosophical in philosophical methodology, and philosophical methodology is just the epistemology of philosophical practice, then philosophical methodology collapses into epistemology.
    Second, even if there are distinctively and uniquely philosophical epistemic tools, the
normative characterization about those tools may be continuous with the characterization of general epistemic tools. Perhaps evaluation of thought experiments is a distinctive
philosophical epistemic method, but perhaps also the underlying account of our ability to

      Interest in these topics is not, of course, a novelty in philosophy. While there has certainly been
a recent resurgence of writing on these sorts of methodological questions, attempts to characterize
the epistemic methodology of philosophers appear recurrently throughout the historical record.
To pick one of many possible examples, Russell extensively characterizes his method of analysis in
The Philosophy of Logical Atomism and elsewhere. Stebbing’s classic “The Method of Analysis in
Metaphysics” makes important steps toward addressing the normative questions by asking, not just
what the method of analysis is, but what the relation between that method and metaphysics could be,
such that analysis would be a way of coming to know metaphysical truths.

=== p. 12 ===

achieve justified beliefs through consideration of thought experiments runs, Williamson-​
style, through “off-​line” deployment of very general faculties for the representation and
modeling of the world around us. If this is the case, then again philosophical methodology
becomes indistinguishable from epistemology in general.
   Not that there’s anything wrong with epistemology. But there are aspects of the use
of “methodology” language that are hard to square with the thought that Philosophical
Methodology is just another name for epistemology. We’ll turn to some specific recalcitrant data in section 5, but I’ll close this section with a different sort of concern. One occasionally encounters criticisms of mainstream “analytic philosophy” for “methodological
narrowness.” Both continental and feminist critiques, for example, will at times raise such
methodological concerns. Thus consider Nancy Tuana’s “Approaches to Feminism” entry
in the SEP, which says:

  • There has been significant debate within feminist philosophical circles concerning
    the effectiveness of particular methods within philosophy for feminist goals. Some,
    for example, have found the methods of analytic philosophy to provide clarity of
    both form and argumentation not found in some schools of Continental philosophy,
    while others have argued that such alleged clarity comes at the expense of rhetorical
    styles and methodological approaches that provide insights into affective, psychic, or
    embodied components of human experience. Other feminists find approaches within
    American pragmatism to provide the clarity of form and argumentation sometimes
    missing in Continental approaches and the connection to real world concerns sometimes missing in analytic approaches. (Tuana, SEP, “Approaches to Feminism”)

The concerns raised here, despite their “methodological” labeling, are not all manifestly
epistemological concerns (consider, for example, the concern about “connection to real
world concerns”). And if methodology just is epistemology, then the narrowness concerns (correct or incorrect) become thoroughly misguided—​as noted above, the epistemic
methods used by philosophers seem to be as broad as they could possibly be.17 Charitable
reconstruction of the narrowness concern, then, seems to require some non-​epistemic
dimension to Philosophical Methodology.

        5. Hypothesis #4: Theory Selectionism

Sometimes, contra Epistemologism, “methodological” talk is explicitly contrasted with
epistemological talk. Thus:

  • Occam’s Razor may be formulated as an epistemic principle: if theory T is simpler than
    theory T*, then it is rational (other things being equal) to believe T rather than T*. Or

  17 Some narrowness concerns can be construed as worries not about what the full range of deployed

epistemic methods is, but about the relative frequencies with which various methods are used. But
not all.

=== p. 13 ===

     it may be formulated as a methodological principle: if T is simpler than T* then it is
     rational to adopt T as one’s working theory for scientific purposes. (Alan Barker, SEP,
     “Simplicity”)

Here to take Occam’s Razor as a methodological principle is precisely not to take it as saying something about the role of simplicity considerations in our epistemology. As a rough
first draft, we can distinguish between taking a realist stance toward our theories, which
involves believing them, and taking an instrumentalist/​anti-​realist stance toward our theories, which involves merely accepting them.18
   A view that takes Philosophical Methodology to be the principles that guide mere theory
acceptance obviously contrasts sharply with Epistemologism, and will not account for the
usages cited in section 4. Moreover, it will reduce Philosophical Methodology to a topic
of interest only given a prior commitment to a particular philosophical position that asks
for a belief/​acceptance distinction in the first place. But we can find a characterization of
Philosophical Methodology that allows unification of these two views. Consider another
discussion of the role of simplicity in theorizing:

  • Unity can be understood as a methodological principle (Wimsatt 1976 and Wimsatt
    2006 for the case of biology and Cat 1998 for physics). One way of doing so is as a simplicity or parsimony condition. But this kind of condition can receive two different
    interpretations: epistemological and ontological. Sober has drawn this distinction to
    shed light on the methodological role of unity hypotheses. He formulates it as a distinction between Peirce’s problem and Hempel’s problem of deciding between competing hypotheses, one unified and the other disunified: Hempel’s problem is how
    to choose between two descriptively true hypotheses in terms of explanatory value;
    Peirce’s problem is how to choose between two explanations in the light of the data
    they explain in terms of their predictive accuracy or likelihood to be true. (Jodi Cat,
    SEP, “The Unity of Science”)

Here again an epistemological and a non-​epistemological use of simplicity is distinguished,
but both are bundled under a common “methodological” heading. What makes them both
“methodological”, it would seem, is that, whether epistemological or not, both are being
used as tools for theory selection.
   Philosophical Methodology, on this view, is the general study of criteria for theory selection. X is a methodological axiom or principle if X is a consideration which favors selecting one theory over another; X is a methodological question if X is a question such that a

     This distinction, of course, has a long and, well-​distinguished history in philosophy of science,
running through Mach, Poincaré, Carnap and the Vienna Circle, and van Fraassen. I won’t attempt
here any non-​caricatured presentation of the nuances of scientific anti-​realism. What matters for our
purposes is that the entanglement of “methodological” talk with the scientific realism/​a nti-​realism
dispute, as manifested in this strand of the usage of “methodological”, seems to be responsible for
the disproportionate representation of philosophy of science in the distribution of occurrences of
“methodological” in the SEP. Although the historical data is sketchy, I think it’s plausible that the
specifically philosophy-​of-​science usage is the primary point of entry for “methodological” talk into
the rest of philosophy.

=== p. 14 ===

theory’s answer to that question plays a role in determining the acceptability of the that
theory. Given that one desideratum for theory selection is that our selected theories be theories we are justified in endorsing, Epistemologism about Philosophical Methodology gets
incorporated as a special case—​facts about how we can achieve knowledge of philosophical
claims turn into facts about how we can select one (philosophical) theory over another.
   Criteria for theory selection can be global considerations (simplicity and unity, support
by intuition or experiment, and so on). But they can also be local and specific to a particular
theoretical enterprise. When we are told:

  • In the search for a theory of quantum mechanics it became a methodological requirement to Bohr that any further theory of the atom should predict values in domains of
    high quantum numbers that should be a close approximation to the values of classical
    physics. (Jan Faye, SEP, “Copenhagen Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics”)

we are thereby given a particular desideratum for theoretical adequacy (close approximation to classical physics in domains of high quantum numbers) that is methodological
because it is part of the method for selecting a theory of quantum mechanics, but which is
not part of a general account of theory selection.19 Or again:

  • Psychologist Zenon Pylyshyn (1984) appeals to multiple realizability to ground a
    methodological criticism of reductionism. He described a pedestrian, having just
    witnessed an automobile accident, rushing into a nearby phone booth and dialing a 9
    and a 1. What will this person do next? Dial another 1, with overwhelming likelihood.
    Why? Because of a systematic generalization holding between what he recognized,
    his background knowledge, his resulting intentions, and that action (intentionally
    described). (John Bickle, SEP, “Multiple Realizability”)

The methodological criticism of reductionism is that reductionism will make unavailable
generalizations crucial to the prediction and explanation of human behavior. The criticism
is thus that a reductionist theory of mind will inevitably fail to meet certain criteria for
theoretical adequacy.
   Philosophical Methodology is on this picture metaphilosophy in the sense that it is an
attempt to characterize what we are trying to do when we do philosophy, rather that a
first-​order attempt to do philosophy. Again we can separate a descriptive and a normative aspect of the project. Normatively, the aim is to say what the goals of philosophy are
(to give a complete catalog of truths, to give a complete catalog of fundamental truths, to
give an explanatory account of the world, to tell us how to live our lives, to interpret the
world in various ways, to change it). Descriptively, the aim is to say how those goals can
be met (through intuitive assessment of thought experiments, by balancing considerations
to achieve epoche, through endorsing simple theories, by working in the language of the
“ontology room”). The excerpts given earlier in this section emphasized the descriptive side
of the enterprise; the normative side is more on display in:

    Of course, the local criterion may follow from global considerations combined with local facts
about the theoretical structure of quantum mechanics.

=== p. 15 ===

  • The extent to which economics bears on and may be influenced by normative concerns raises methodological questions about the relationships between a positive
    science concerning “facts” and a normative inquiry into what ought to be. Most economists and methodologists believe that there is a reasonably clear distinction between
    facts and values, between what is and what ought to be, and they believe that most of
    economics should be regarded as a positive science that helps policy makers choose
    means to accomplish their ends, though it does not bear on the choice of ends itself.
    (Daniel Hausman, SEP, “Philosophy of Economics”)

The normative side of Theory Selectionism Philosophical Methodology takes center stage
in much recent work on ontological commitment (metaontology or metametaphysics), in
which a crucial question is what counts as an adequate theory of the world, from which
ontological commitments can be read off.
   If Epistemologist Philosophical Methodology threatens to relocate Philosophical
Methodology entirely within epistemology, to what field of philosophy do methodological
questions belong on the current conception? Metaphysics, for example, is responsible for
providing a description of the fundamental constituents of the world—​but who is responsible for saying what kind of theory metaphysics ought to be providing? Not, on pain of
regress, metaphysics itself. Of course, not every philosophical activity needs to have a taxonomic box to contain it. And to some extent Philosophical Methodology, so conceived, will
be outsourced to multiple parts of philosophy. (We have already seen the epistemological
involvement in the Philosophical Methodology project. Consider also the Williamsonian
view that what epistemology should do is to take knowledge as a primitive, rather than seek
an analysis of knowledge—​t his looks to be a piece of Philosophical Methodology driven
by considerations drawn from philosophy of language about what constitutes an analysis.)
But perhaps there is also a suggestion here that another “meta” category needs to be added
to our traditional individuation of philosophical subfields.

                  6. Hypothesis #5: Necessary
                      Preconditionalism

“Methodological” talk is used quite differently in Giuseppina D’Oro and James Connelly’s
SEP entry on Robin George Collingwood:

  • According to Collingwood, neither the proposition “mind exists” nor the proposition “matter exists” is a metaphysical proposition in the traditional sense. They are
    not metaphysical propositions because they do not assert the existence of metaphysical kinds (mind and matter) but of the methodological assumptions that govern the
    study of mind and nature. These propositions are, as Collingwood puts it, philosophical propositions which define the domains of enquiry or subject matters of the science of history and nature…. As already mentioned, philosophical propositions are
    not presented as necessary existential claims but as methodologically necessary ones.
    (D’Oro and Connelly, SEP, “Robin George Collingwood”)

=== p. 16 ===

What does it mean to call a proposition “methodologically necessary”? Apparently, that
assuming that proposition is a necessary precondition to carrying out theorizing of some
form. We see this idea at play, for example, in:

  • For logical empiricism, the philosophical significance of relativity theory was above
    all methodological, that conventions must first be laid down in order to express
    the empirical content of a physical theory. (Ryckman, SEP, “Early Philosophical
    Interpretations of General Relativity”)

Roughly, there is methodological significance here because there is realization that conventions are a necessary precondition to scientific theorizing, because conventions are needed
to mediate between theory and observation in order to have an account of theory confirmation and disconfirmation. This picture of Methodology is explicitly endorsed, for example, in Dever (2006):

  • Call Φ a methodological principle for activity A if Φ either is, or is a logical consequence of, a claim whose truth is a constitutive feature of performance of A.20

Necessary Preconditionalism provides a satisfyingly “deep” and unified account of what
Philosophical Methodology is. Moreover, it’s an account that can subsume earlier positions
as special cases. It is presumably a necessary precondition on engaging in theorizing of any
sort that we have an account of what the conditions of adequacy for the theoretical enterprise are, and of what the epistemic methods are by which justification with respect to the
tenets of the theory can be achieved. So Epistemologism and Theory Selectionism can be
seen as pursuing particular forms of necessary preconditions.
   However, Necessary Preconditionalism is not a satisfying account of Philosophical
Methodology without an accompanying account of what exactly necessary preconditions
are (or of what constitutive features of activities are), and it is not clear we have such an
account. Recall one of our first examples of “methodological” talk—​t he “sensible methodological adage that ‘correlation does not imply causation’ ” (Stanford, “Underdetermination
of Scientific Theory”). In what sense is the claim that correlation does not imply causation a necessary precondition for (one supposes) construction of scientific theories?
Since causation is a significant ideological element of many scientific theories, an ability
to individuate the causal feature of the world from the merely correlative feature, or the
ability to reach justified conclusions about causation on the basis of distributional facts,
will certainly be helpful in theoretical construction. But is this a necessary precondition?
Not, it would appear, unless facts about the significant ideological elements of any enterprise are ipso facto necessary preconditions for that enterprise. At a minimum, Necessary
Preconditionalism seems to require a strong essentialism about philosophical enterprises.
If the deployment of causal notions is somehow essential to the scientific enterprise, then
the “sensible methodological adage” is perhaps plausibly preconditional, but if it is a contingent theoretical discovery that causation is a central notion in scientific theorizing, then
preconditionalism is less plausible.

        And again, a certain amount of uncomfortable autobiographical reflection is involved here.

=== p. 17 ===

              7. Hypothesis #6: Hierarchicalism

Consider three more uses of “methodological” talk, each of which has something in common with the “necessary precondition” scheme:

       a. There are some complex and rather subtle issues involved in this methodological
          controversy. It is common ground to all these theories, including Hart’s, that any
          attempt to understand what the law is, must rely on a fairly elaborate understanding of law’s functions in society, and of the ways in which the law is constituted to
          fulfill those functions. Furthermore, it seems very plausible to maintain, as Hart
          himself suggested, that we cannot understand law without understanding the ways
          in which it is typically regarded by those whose law it is, namely, by those who normally regard the law as giving reasons for their actions. (Andrei Marmor, SEP, “The
          Nature of Law”)
       b. [Operationalism] is commonly considered a theory of meaning which states that
          “we mean by any concept nothing more than a set of operations; the concept is synonymous with the corresponding set of operations” (Bridgman 1927, 5). That drastic statement was made in The Logic of Modern Physics, published in 1927 by the
          American physicist P. W. Bridgman…. However, as Bridgman’s ideas gained currency they were shaped into a general philosophical doctrine of “operationalism” or
          “operationism”, and in that form became very influential in many areas, especially
          in methodological debates in psychology. (Hasok Chang, SEP, “Operationalism”)
       c. An empirical study in historical science, in the end, cannot do without a metaphysics of history. Bridging irrational reality and rational concept in historical science,
          or overcoming hiatus irrationalis (á la Lask) without recourse to a metaphysics of
          history still remained a problem as acutely as before. While accepting the broadly
          neo-​Kantian conceptual template as Rickert elaborated it, Weber’s methodological
          writings would turn mostly on this issue. (Sung Ho Kim, SEP, “Max Weber”)

   The passage from Marmor appears to trace a methodological issue by holding that
claims in philosophy of law depend on prior claims about the function of law in society, and
that about the function of law depend on prior claims about reasons for action. Similarly,
the Chang passage traces a methodological issue from a starting point in the philosophy of
science to the philosophy of language. And Kim moves from a starting point in historical
science, to issues about rationality and irrationality, to a “metaphysics of history.”
   Schematically, all three methodological issues are characterized in terms of dependency
hierarchies:

  • Law ⇒(depends on) Collective Action ⇒(depends on) Rationality
  • Science ⇒(depends on) Language ⇒(depends on) Epistemology21
  • History ⇒(depends on) Epistemology ⇒(depends on) Metaphysics

    The invocation of Epistemology is not overt in the given passage from Chang, but epistemological
concerns are a standard point of engagement with operationalist theories of meaning.

=== p. 18 ===

This suggests a hierarchicalist picture of Philosophical Methodology: there are chains of
dependency relations between different areas of philosophy, and “methodological” considerations are considerations that require retreat from area A up a stage in the hierarchy
to area B on which area A depends. The hope here is to put some meat on the Necessary
Preconditionalist bones by using the overarching hierarchical structuring of philosophical
subdisciplines to determine what the necessary preconditions of any particular theoretical
enterprise are. Methodology is, at heart, the right-​ordering of the philosophical disciplines.
   Hierarchicalism validates what I take to be a common-​sense view that methodological concerns are in some way “philosophically deep”, because in raising methodological concerns we are (according to Hierarchicalism) moving up the dependency ladder.
Unfortunately, the background assumption that there is a suitable partial ordering of the
fields of philosophy looks to be wholly without plausibility. Many parts of philosophy have
over the years laid claim to the title of “first philosophy”, but none of the claimants has made
a plausible defense of the title. Which, for example, is prior: metaphysics or epistemology?
Are we to believe that epistemology is prior to metaphysics, because we start with how we
can know things, and then form a theory of the way the world is that is answerable to the
epistemological concerns? Or are we to believe that metaphysics is prior to epistemology,
because we start with the nature of the world, and then work out how our epistemic faculties could fit into and engage with that world. Neither picture seems likely to win out over
the other, and without a victor, Hierarchicalism is impossible.22

                 8. Interlude: The Puzzle Solved

I have one more hypothesis on the nature of Philosophical Methodology to try out, but
before I wrap things up I want to provide a solution to the earlier math puzzle. Order the
residents of Springfield in some arbitrary manner. Then each club can be associated with an
ordered 1,000-​tuple of 0’s and 1’s—​w ith a position in the tuple filled by 1 if the corresponding Springfield resident is a club member, and by a 0 otherwise. No two clubs can have
exactly the same members—​t he two clubs would both have an odd number of members,
and hence an odd number of members in common. Thus 1,000-​tuples are uniquely associated with clubs.
   Consider these 1,000-​tuples as vectors in the vector space on the field {0,1}. Now consider
dot products of these vectors. Here are two observations:

       a. The dot product of any club vector with itself is 1. The dot product of a vector with
          itself will produce a sum of 1’s for each 1 in the original vector. Since the club must
          have an odd number of members, this sum must be a sum of an odd number of 1’s.
          But in the field {0,1}, the sum of an odd number of 1’s is 1.

     There is furthermore a tension between the two thoughts that (a) the “methodological stance” is
available in every area of philosophy, and (b) philosophy is, in a roughly Tarskian sense, a semantically
closed enterprise. From (a) we will derive that the hierarchy of philosophy is not well-​founded, which
seems to deprive us of the foundational stance underwriting the universality required by (b).

=== p. 19 ===

    b. The dot product of any two distinct club vectors is 0. The dot product will produce
       1’s in its sum only for residents who are members of both clubs. But there must be an
       even number of such residents. So the dot product is a sum of an even number of 1’s.
       In the field {0,1}, such a sum is 0.

But this shows that the club vectors form part of a basis for the vector space. The vector
space is a 1,000-​dimensional space, so any basis contains 1,000 vectors. Thus there can be at
most 100 club vectors, and hence at most 1,000 clubs. It’s then easy to see that this number
can be realized.
   This is a common pattern in mathematical work. A problem apparently in one area (here,
combinatorics) is revealed to be “really” a problem in another area (linear algebra), and a
powerful and elegant solution of a previously difficult problem is produced by recharacter-izing the problem in the new area and bringing to bear the resources of that other area. It’s
often a recipe for achieving “deep” insights in mathematics. (Another example: seeing that
the compactness of propositional logic can be proved by appeal to Tychonoff’s Theorem
opens up insights into the relation between logic and topology.) End of interlude (but hold
the thought).

            9. Hypothesis #7: Eliminatedivism

The final hypothesis about Philosophical Methodology begins with the thought that there’s
something right about Hierarchicalism. “Methodological” or “meta-​” is often a label we
apply to philosophical moves that invoke the relevance of considerations from philosophical sub-​discipline Y to a question in philosophical sub-​discipline X. A couple of representative instances:

  • Metaethics invokes, roughly, metaphysics and philosophy of language in approaching
    questions in ethics.
  • Meta-​ontology invokes, roughly, questions in philosophy of language and epistemology in approaching questions in metaphysics.

It’s easy to think we’re “moving upward”; getting closer and closer to the deep and fundamental issues.
    But consider a sample bit of philosophical reasoning in more detail:

  • We’re interested in (say) the contextualism/​relativism dispute in philosophy of language. We invoke some philosophy of logic to see that the two sides agree on all the
    moving parts of the logical machinery, on one way of construing it. The disagreement
    is over which parts are under the control of the semantics, and which under the control of the pragmatics. This leads to the question of where to draw the semantics/​pragmatics line, which in turn leads to questions of what aspects of linguistic engagements
    can be explained through general principles of rational action and which through
    game-​theoretic consequences of information manipulation. In thinking through

=== p. 20 ===

     the game theory, we come to realize that the crucial issue is whether information is
     characterized via a relational or a monadic truth predicate. This transitions to a question in metaphysics: how substantive is our notion of truth, and what features of the
     world does it answer to? Examining a substantive notion of truth leads to developing a
     theory of facts, which in turn leads to consideration of the Bradley regress argument.
     We’re then put back into semantics, as we consider the role of unsaturated senses in
     resolving this argument. And so on.

   There’s no hierarchy here. We move from philosophy of language to philosophy of logic to
metaphysics, but then from metaphysics back to philosophy of language. So there is movement from one area of philosophy to another, and movement that is, in some important
sense, methodologically driven. But the movement isn’t the tracing of a pre-​given hierarchical structuring of the field. It is rather, as in the example of The Puzzle, part of the ongoing
attempt to do better work, and achieve more and deeper insights, by thinking about how
various components of the field relate to one another, rather than allowing one’s work to
reside entirely in one subdiscipline of philosophy.
   Here, then, is a final picture. Philosophical Methodology is the study of philosophical method: how to do philosophy well. But at the end of the day there isn’t much to say
about how to do philosophy well. There are some general guiding aphorisms, and “be on
the lookout for the relevance of epistemology to your questions in philosophy of language”
is one of them. But the guiding aphorisms guide only very loosely—​t here’s no recipe telling you precisely when to invoke epistemological considerations in linguistic theorizing. There’s only the skillful receptiveness to possible fruitful interactions. On this view,
there’s a half-​triumph for the first hypothesis of Eliminativism. There is such a thing as
Philosophical Methodology—​it’s the study of the rules of good philosophical practice. But
there are no rules of good philosophical practice, so we have instead Eliminativism about
philosophical methodology. Philosophical Methodology is not itself eliminated, but has an
eliminated topic.

                                         appendix

 Entries in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
       That Use the word “Methodological”

Methodological Individualism, Naturalism, Naturalism in Philosophy of Mathematics,
Philosophy of Economics, Behaviorism, Physicalism, Historicist Theories of Rationality,
Reductionism in Biology, Robin George Collingwood, Max Weber, Unity of Science,
Holism and Nonseparability in Physics, Formal Learning Theory, Creationism, The
Incommensurability of Scientific Theories, The Pure Theory of Law, The Nature of
Law, Early Philosophical Interpretations of General Relativity, Naturalism in Legal
Philosophy, Simplicity, Dedekind’s Contributions to the Foundations of Mathematics,
Thomas Kuhn, Analysis, Collective Responsibility, Philosophy of Biology, Feminist
History of Philosophy, Feminist Perspectives on Science, Lvov-​Warsaw School, Identity
and Individuation in Quantum Theory, Quantum Gravity, Paul Feyerabend, Analytic

=== p. 21 ===

Feminism, Comparative Philosophy: Chinese and Western, Hermeneutics, Hume’s
Naturalism and Anti-​Naturalism, Animal Consciousness, Empathy, Theory and Bioethics,
Cosmology: Methodological Debates in the 1930s and 1940s, Max Horkheimer, Mathematical
Style, Moral Non-​Naturalism, Multiple Realizability, Scientific Progress, Symmetry and
Symmetry Breaking, Copenhagen Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics, Religion and
Science, Cognitive Science, The Kokugaku, The Theology of Aristotle, John Stuart Mill,
Aristotle’s Biology, The Biological Notion of Self and Non-​Self, Darwinism, Discourse
Representation Theory, Edmund Husserl, Monism, Operationalism, Underdetermination
of Scientific Theory, Scientific Realism, Philosophy of Technology, Teleological Theories of
Mental Content, Personal Identity and Ethics, Moral Psychology: Empirical Approaches,
Bell’s Theorem, Rene Descartes, Jurgen Habermas, The Philosophy of Neuroscience,
Evolution, Feminist Epistemology and Philosophy of Science, Colonialism, Naturalized
Epistemology, Business Ethics, Pragmatist Feminism, Hans-​        Georg Gadamer, Charles
Hartshorne, James Mill, Karl Jaspers, Karl Marx, Richard Rorty, Scientific Revolutions,
Aristotelianism in the Renaissance, Approaches to Feminism, Implicature, Public
Justification, Joseph Kaspi, Communitarianism, Externalism About Mental Content,
Dewey’s Moral Philosophy, Ecology, Philosophy of Education, Einstein’s Philosophy of
Science, Francis Bacon, Distributive Justice, The Analysis of Knowledge, Combining Logics,
Paul Natorp, Plato, Alfred Schulz, Thermodynamic Asymmetries in Time, Wilhelm von
Humboldt, Vienna Circle, Logic and Artificial Intelligence, Arabic and Islamic Philosophy
of Language and Logic, Attention, Russell’s Logical Atomism, Moral Epistemology,
Experiment in Physics, Units and Levels of Selection, Albert the Great, Aristotle, Aristotle on
Causality, Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer, Critical Theory, Evolutionary Epistemology, The
Frame Problem, Pierre Gassendi, Johan Gottfriend von Herder, Hobbes’s Moral and Political
Philosophy, Epistemic Logic, Indispensibility Arguments in the Philosophy of Mathematics,
Abilities, Aristotle’s Psychology, Auguste Comte, Etienne Bonnot de Condillac, Pierre
Duhem, John Duns Scotus, Ernst Mach, Feminist Social Epistemology, Gadamer’s
Aesthetics, Herman von Helmholtz, Hilbert’s Program, Japanese Zen Buddhist Philosophy,
Kant’s Philosophy of Science, Law and Language, Legal Obligation and Authority, Models
in Science, Nothingness, William of Ockham, Panpsychism, Personalism, Phenomenology,
Pseudo-​ Dionysius the Areopagite, Carl Stumpf, Truthlikeness, 18th Century French
Aesthetics, Joseph Albo, Antonio Rosmini, Peirre Bayle, Philosophy for Children,
Contradiction, Decision-​Making Capacity, Defaults in Semantics and Pragmatics, Doing
vs. Allowing Harm, Epiphenomenalism, Shem Tov Ibn Falaquera, Feminist Metaphysics,
Michel Foucault, Galileo Galilei, Ibn Kammuna, The Historical Controversies Surrounding
Innateness, William James, The Economic Analysis of Law, The Natural Law Tradition
in Ethics, Simpson’s Paradox, Francesco Patrizi, John Philoponus, Giovannia Pico della
Mirandola, Platonism in the Philosophy of Mathematics, Science and Pseudo-​Science, Reid
on Memory and Personal Identity, Saadya, The Social Dimensions of Scientific Knowledge,
Scottish Philosophy in the 19th Century, Wilfrid Sellars, Chauncey Wright, Bolzano’s Logic,
Roderick Chisholm, Feminist Philosophy of Religion, Intentionality, Leibniz’s Philosophy of
Physics, Stanislaw Lesniewski, Philosophy of Mathematics, Quantum Field Theory, Roger
Bacon, Eugen Rosenstock-​Huessy, Franz Rosenzweig, The Problem of Induction, Neutral
Monism, Relativism, Animal Cognition, Descriptions, Plato’s Ethics: An Overview, Henry
Sedgwick, Epistemological Problems of Testimony, Cosmological Argument, Nicholas of
Cusa, Delusion, Descartes’ Physics, Dialetheism, Wilhelm Dilthey, Feminist Perspectives on
Disability, Feminist Bioethics, Feminist Perspectives on Power, Fictionalism, Herman Lotze,
Identity, The Distinction Between Innate and Acquired Characteristics, Liberalism, Locke’s

=== p. 22 ===

Philosophy of Science, The Logic of Action, Mental Illness, Maurice Merleau-​Ponty, Moral
Relativism, Is Either Moral Realism or Moral Anti-​Realism More Intuitive Than the Other,
Natural Law Theories, Postmodernism, Pragmatism, Private Language, Petrus Ramus,
Paul Ricoeur, Gilbert Ryle, August Wilhelm von Schlegel, Phenomenological Approaches
to Self-​ Consciousness, Naturalistic Approaches to Social Construction, Space and
Time: Inertial Frames, Species, Alfred Tarski, Teleological Arguments for God’s Existence,
Wihelm Maximilian Wundt, Bernard Bolzano, Introspection, The Kyoto School, Mental
Imagery, Saint Thomas Aquinas, Aquinas’ Moral, Political, and Legal Philosophy, Isaiah
Berlin, The Metaphysics of Causation, Probabilistic Causation, Epistemic Contextualism,
Evidence, Kant’s Philosophical Development, Kant and Hume on Causality, Alexius
Meinong, Molecular Genetics, Moral Anti-​Realism, Auditory Perception, Method and
Metaphysics in Plato’s Sophist and Statesman, Pornography and Censorship, John Rawls,
Social Institutions, Structural Realism, Temporal Parts, Truth Values, Bernard Williams,
Game Theory, Aristotle’s Ethics, Chaos, Consciousness, Continuity and Infinitesimals,
Analytic Philosophy in Early Modern India, Kurt Godel, Thomas Hill Green, International
Justice, Independence Friendly Logic, Molecular Biology, Newton’s Philosophiae Naturalis
Principia Mathematica, Pain, Paradoxes and Contemporary Logic, Philosophy of Religion,
Scientific Explanation, Sidney Hook, Absolute and Relational Theories of Space and
Motion, Empathy: The Study of Cognitive Empathy and Empathic Accuracy, Innateness
and Language, Mental Imagery: European Responses of Jaensch, Freud, and Gestalt
Psychology, Mental Imagery: Founders of Experimental Psychology Wilhelm Wundt and
William James, Experiment in Physics Appendix 4: The Fall of the Fifth Force, Thomas Reid,
18th Century German Aesthetics, Pleasure, David Lewis’s Metaphysics: The Contingency
of Humean Supervenience, Sociobiology: Construction of Sociobiological Explanations,
Analysis: Conceptions of Analysis in Analytic Philosophy, Analysis: Definitions and
Descriptions of Analysis
   To give a rough classification of these articles: 97 are in history of philosophy (with all articles devoted to specific persons counted as history), 53 are in philosophy of science (20 in
general philosophy of science, 19 in philosophy of physics, and 14 in philosophy of biology), 28
are in philosophy of mind, 15 are in ethics, 14 are in epistemology, 13 are in metaphysics, 12 are
in philosophy of language, 12 are in feminist philosophy, nine are in logic, nine are in philosophy of mathematics, seven are in non-​Western philosophy, six are in philosophy of law, five
are in political philosophy, two are in philosophy of action, two are in philosophy of education, and one is in Continental philosophy. One interesting question (which I won’t attempt
to answer here) is why “methodological” talk is so heavily concentrated in historical pieces.
The phenomenon is partially explained by the prevalence of named-​figure articles in the SEP
devoted to figures from the philosophy of science (the strong representation of philosophy
of science in “methodological” talk was addressed in section 5), but that partial explanation
leaves a substantial phenomenon unexplained.

References
Allen, Colin, “Animal Consciousness”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter
  2011 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <http://​plato.stanford.edu/​archives/​w in2011/​
  entries/​consciousness-​animal/​>, accessed September 9, 2015.

=== p. 23 ===

Baker, Alan, “Simplicity”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2013 Edition),
  Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <http://​plato.stanford.edu/​archives/​fall2013/​entries/​simplicity/​>, accessed September 9, 2015.
Bickle, John, “Multiple Realizability”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2013
  Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <http://​plato.stanford.edu/​archives/​spr2013/​
  entries/​multiple-​realizability/​>, accessed September 9, 2015.
Brigandt, Ingo and Love, Alan, “Reductionism in Biology”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of
  Philosophy (Summer 2012 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <http://​plato.stanford.
  edu/​archives/​sum2012/​entries/​reduction-​biology/​>, accessed September 9, 2015.
Cassirer, Ernst (1921), Einstein’s Theory of Relativity. Chicago: Open Court.
Cat, Jordi, “The Unity of Science”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2013
  Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <http://​plato.stanford.edu/​archives/​sum2013/​
  entries/​scientific-​unity/​>, accessed September 9, 2015.
Chang, Hasok, “Operationalism”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2009
  Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <http://​plato.stanford.edu/​archives/​fall2009/​
  entries/​operationalism/​>, accessed September 9, 2015.
Dever, Josh (2006). “Compositionality”. In Ernest Lepore and Barry Smith, eds., The Oxford
  Handbook of Philosophy of Language, pp. 633–666. Oxford University Press.
D’Oro, Giuseppina and Connelly, James, “Robin George Collingwood”, The Stanford
  Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2010 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <http://​
  plato.stanford.edu/​archives/​sum2010/​entries/​collingwood/​>, accessed September 9, 2015.
Faye, Jan, “Copenhagen Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics”, The Stanford Encyclopedia
  of Philosophy (Fall 2008 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <http://​plato.stanford.edu/​
  archives/​fall2008/​entries/​qm-​copenhagen/​>, accessed September 9, 2015.
Finnis, John, “Natural Law Theories”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2011
  Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <http://​plato.stanford.edu/​archives/​fall2011/​
  entries/​natural-​law-​t heories/​>, accessed September 9, 2015.
Geurts, Bart and Beaver, David I., “Discourse Representation Theory”, The Stanford
  Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2011 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <http://​
  plato.stanford.edu/​archives/​fall2011/​entries/​discourse-​representation-​t heory/​>, accessed
Hausman, Daniel M., “Philosophy of Economics”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
  (Spring 2013 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <http://​plato.stanford.edu/​archives/​
  spr2013/​entries/​economics/​>, accessed September 9, 2015.
Kim, Sung Ho, “Max Weber”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2012 Edition),
  Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <http://​plato.stanford.edu/​archives/​fall2012/​entries/​weber/​
  >, accessed September 9, 2015.
Marmor, Andrei, “The Nature of Law”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter
  2011 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <http://​plato.stanford.edu/​archives/​w in2011/​
  entries/​lawphil-​nature/​>, accessed September 9, 2015.
Ramberg, Bjørn and Gjesdal, Kristin, “Hermeneutics”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of
  Philosophy (Summer 2013 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <http://​plato.stanford.
  edu/​archives/​sum2013/​entries/​hermeneutics/​>, accessed September 9, 2015.
Russell, Bertrand (1918), The Philosophy of Logical Atomism. New York: Routledge.
Ryckman, Thomas A. (2005), The Reign of Relativity: Philosophy in Physics 1915-​              1925.
  Oxford: Oxford University Press.

=== p. 24 ===

Ryckman, Thomas A., “Early Philosophical Interpretations of General Relativity”, The Stanford
   Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2012 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <http://​plato.
   stanford.edu/​archives/​fall2012/​entries/​genrel-​early/​>, accessed September 9, 2015.
Shields, Christopher, “Aristotle’s Psychology”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
   (Spring 2011 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <http://​plato.stanford.edu/​archives/​
   spr2011/​entries/​aristotle-​psychology/​>, accessed September 9, 2015.
Sorensen, Roy, “Nothingness”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2012
   Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <http://​plato.stanford.edu/​archives/​w in2012/​
   entries/​nothingness/​>, accessed September 9, 2015.
Stanford, Kyle, “Underdetermination of Scientific Theory”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of
   Philosophy (Winter 2013 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), forthcoming URL = <http://​
   plato.stanford.edu/​archives/​w in2013/​entries/​scientific-​underdetermination/​>, accessed
Stebbing, Susan (1932). “The Method of Analysis in Metaphysics”. Proceedings of the
   Aristotelian Society 33: 65–​94.
Stueber, Karsten, “Empathy”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2013
   Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <http://​plato.stanford.edu/​archives/​sum2013/​
   entries/​empathy/​>, accessed September 9, 2015.
Szabó, Zoltán Gendler, “Compositionality”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall
   2013 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <http://​plato.stanford.edu/​archives/​fall2013/​
   entries/​compositionality/​>, accessed September 9, 2015.
Thagard, Paul, “Cognitive Science”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2012
   Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <http://​plato.stanford.edu/​archives/​fall2012/​
   entries/​cognitive-​science/​>, accessed September 9, 2015.
Tuana, Nancy, “Approaches to Feminism”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring
   2011 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <http://​plato.stanford.edu/​archives/​spr2011/​
   entries/​feminism-​approaches/​>, accessed September 9, 2015.

=== p. 25 ===

      Pa rt I I

T R A DI T IONS A N D
   A PPROAC H E S

