=== chunk: cappelen-gendler-hawthorne-2016-oxford-handbook/ch19-hajek-philosophical-heuristics ===
title: Hájek, "Philosophical Heuristics and Methodology"
source_pdf: docs/sources/cappelen-gendler-hawthorne-2016-oxford-handbook/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 365-390
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 348
plan_page_end: 373
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 348 ===

                                     Chapter 19

  Phil osophica l Heu r istics
     a n d Phil osophica l
         M ethodol ogy
                                      Alan Hájek

                                 1. Introduction

Metaphilosophy is all the rage nowadays.1 Philosophers are becoming increasingly self-​
conscious about their methodology, as this volume showcases. And rightly so—​it is part
of our job description to put thinking under the microscope, and that obviously should
include our philosophical thinking. Much as we want philosophers of physics, of biology, of
mathematics, and so on to scrutinize those respective disciplines, so we want philosophers
of philosophy to scrutinize ours.
    When I look at the ways that much philosophy gets done, I see certain recurring patterns
of thought. The best philosophers repeatedly deploy a wealth of philosophical techniques.
I see them used in papers, books, talks, Q & A sessions, and philosophical discussion more
broadly. Since I was a graduate student I have observed them, and when they have seemed
especially fecund to me, I have recorded them on an ongoing list and I have tried to internalize them. After all, they are part of the philosopher’s intellectual armoury, much as logic
is. We may call them philosophical heuristics.
    But unlike logic, they are not studied or taught. We just use them, but we typically do not
do so self-​consciously; indeed, we may often use them unconsciously, unaware that we are
even doing so. Despite the importance of such heuristics to philosophical methodology,

  1 Thanks especially to John Barker, Paul Bartha, Bert Baumgaertner, Sharon Berry, Rachael

Briggs, Mark Colyvan, Tamar Szabó Gendler, Patrick Greenough, Robbie Hirsch, Yoaav Isaacs, Ben
Levinstein, Hanti Lin, Peter Menzies, Bernard Molyneux, Daniel Nolan, Wolfgang Schwarz, Michael
Simpson, Nick Smith, and to audiences at the 2012 Australian Association of Philosophy conference
and at Macquarie University for helpful discussion and/​or comments on earlier drafts. Thanks also to
Ralph Miles for editorial assistance.

=== p. 349 ===

they have been surprisingly neglected by philosophers. (Nozick 1993 is a notable exception,
but even his discussion of some of them is confined to just over eight pages.)
   Practitioners of various other disciplines have not been so remiss regarding their
own heuristics. Mathematicians, for example, often teach their students heuristics for
approaching problems, and there are numerous books (e.g. Pólya’s 1957 classic How to Solve
It) detailing them. Here’s one that I learned from a mathematics professor: if you are struggling to prove something because it seems obvious, try reductio ad absurdum. Or again,
music professors teach their students various ‘rules’ of harmony and counterpoint, which
really are rules of thumb: avoid consecutive fifths and octaves, and so on. No mathematician or musician pretends that once you have mastered such heuristics, you will be the next
Gauss or Beethoven, but it would be absurd to question their utility as strategies for guiding
one’s thinking or creativity.
   Almost any complex activity has its heuristics—​cooking, rock-​climbing, photography,
gymnastics, playing the xylophone, salsa dancing, taxi driving, taxidermy (I assume) …
It would be odd if philosophy, one of the most complex activities of which we are capable,
didn’t have heuristics. And it obviously does—​hundreds that I’ve identified so far. Some are
exclusively philosophical heuristics, while others are more general-​purpose heuristics for
conducting one’s thoughts that one finds employed elsewhere. And still others are not so
much ‘heuristics’ in a narrow sense, but fruitful patterns of thinking. Despite this chapter’s
title, I won’t put much weight on either the word ‘philosophical’ or ‘heuristics’. I am happy
to include philosophically fertile strategies, however we might best label them.2
   It would be strange counsel to remain silent about them: [whispered] ‘Yes, they’re out
there (unfortunately), but don’t tell anyone else about them!’ And yet I have encountered
some critics who view my project with the sort of suspicion visited upon a magician who
breaks ranks with his fellow magicians by revealing some of the secrets of their trade. Well,
I’ll let you in on a few of the secrets of our trade. But then, I bet that you tacitly know some
or all of them anyway; I’m just making them explicit.
   I have already presented a first batch of heuristics in my (2014). There I discussed such
techniques as:

  • Check extreme cases, and near-​extreme cases. These are especially promising places to
    look first for counterexamples, and doing so reduces your search space.
  • Death by diagonalization: reflexivity/​self-​reference. Plug into a function itself as its
    own argument, and more generally, appeal to self-​referential cases. It worked for
    Cantor, Russell, and Gödel; it may work for you.
  • Self-​undermining views. Relatedly, check whether a philosophical position or argument that falls in the very domain that it purports to cover treats itself consistently.
  • Begetting new arguments out of old. Good arguments are often easily transformed
    from one domain to another. Exploit analogies between, e.g. space, time, and modality; and between rationality and morality.
  • Trial and error. When ingenuity fails you, sometimes you can just run systematically
    through the relevant cases until you find one that meets your needs.

    For example, Kahneman and Tversky (1982) use the word ‘heuristic’ in a somewhat different sense
from mine.

=== p. 350 ===

I stressed that they are not sure-​fire recipes to philosophizing—​t here are none—​but rather
defeasible guides that tend to work.
   Here comes a new batch. I will focus on a cluster of heuristics that have some interesting
family resemblances. Indeed, resemblance is a theme that unites several of them. For instance,
there may be multiple candidates for some role (a concept, a choice, a solution to a problem, or
what have you), which are very similar in relevant respects. As a result, they appear to play the
role equally well. How should we respond to that? I canvas various heuristics that are motivated by or that exploit this problem, which will then fan out to other related heuristics.
   Away we go.

1.1 See Definite Descriptions in Neon Lights
A philosophical thesis or an analysis that involves a definite description ‘… the F … ’ typically presupposes that there is exactly one F. Ask:

       i) Are there, or could there be, multiple F’s?
      ii) Are there, or could there be, no F’s?

In short, check to see if there are any or many F’s. The hard task of looking for problem cases
has been broken down into two easier sub-​tasks. i) and ii) correspond to tests for uniqueness and existence, respectively, familiar in mathematics.
   Examples:

1.1.1 Counterfactuals
Stalnaker (1968) analyses counterfactuals3 along the following lines:

      if it were the case that X, it would be the case that Y’ is true
                                iff
      Y is true at THE nearest X-​world.

(Since I do not have a neon-​lights font at my disposal, the capital letters will have to do.)
The ‘THE’ indicates the assumption that for any X, there is a unique nearest X-​world. Lewis
(1973a) has two main objections:

      i) There may be multiple nearest X-​worlds. ‘If Bizet and Verdi were compatriots, then . . .’
          Would they both be Italian, or both be French? It seems that nothing favours one nationality over the other. So there are at least two nearest worlds in which they are compatriots.
          More generally, Stalnaker’s analysis appears to founder on cases in which there are ties for
          the nearest X-​worlds.
      ii) There may be no nearest X-​worlds. ‘If I were taller than 7 feet, then …’ How tall would
           I be? 7 feet 1 inch? 7 feet ½ inch? 7 feet ¼ inch? . . .’ We apparently have an infinite

    In fact, his analysis is of conditionals in general, but Lewis’s reply, to which I turn, concerns
counterfactuals more specifically.

=== p. 351 ===

       sequence of ever-​closer worlds in which I am taller than 7 feet, with none closest. More
       generally, Stalnaker’s analysis appears to founder on cases in which there are no nearest X-​worlds.

1.1.2 The Problem of Evil
A well-​k nown argument against various forms of theism goes like this:

    If an omnipotent, omniscient, omnibenevolent God existed, then such a God would have
    created THE best of all possible worlds. But the actual world is not the best of all possible
    worlds; therefore such a God does not exist.

    i) Perhaps there are many worlds tied for first place in the relevant ‘goodness’ ordering. In that case the argument needs to be recast: God would have created (at least?)
       one of them, and the actual world is not one of them.
   ii) Perhaps worlds get better and better without end—​none best. Imagine an infinite
       sequence of worlds in which there are successively more happy people, or more
       happy rabbits … , each world better than its predecessor.

1.1.3 Functionalism
Functionalist accounts of theoretical and folk-​theoretical terms often invoke locutions
such as ‘the X role’ (neon lights), or better still for my purposes, ‘the occupant of the X role’
(double neon lights). This presupposes that there is exactly one such role, and exactly one
such occupant. Functionalists speak, for instance, of ‘the occupant of the pain role’ (which
is ritually taken to be the firing of c-​fibres). Lycan (2009) argues that the presupposition
of a single occupant begs the question against the dualist view according to which pain
behaviour is causally overdetermined, being caused both by physical neural events and
non-​physical pain events. One might also question whether there is an occupant of the role
at all; and whether there is a single pain role—​for example, perhaps different folk theories
assign it different roles.
   So far, the examples have been familiar. Now, let me use the heuristic to make a less
familiar point—​to do some new philosophical work.

1.1.4 Velocity as the Time-​Derivative of Position
Nearly every physics textbook analyses velocity as the time derivative of position:
                                            v = dx / dt.
THE time derivative. Let’s subject this analysis to our heuristic:

    i) I see no problem with there being multiple time-​derivatives of position. To be sure,
       there may be many time variables, corresponding to many frames of reference; but

=== p. 352 ===

       in that case there are correspondingly many velocities, one for each time variable.
       The heuristic came up empty-​handed here.
   ii) I do see a problem with the time-​derivative not existing. There are functions that
       are not differentiable everywhere; in fact, there are functions that are differentiable
       nowhere; in fact, there are functions that are continuous everywhere and differentiable nowhere. Weierstrass discovered such pathological ‘saw-​tooth’ functions. Now
       think of a particle whose position function of time is such a function. This particle
       moves highly erratically, darting this way, then that, in a wild manner. Yet it traces a
       continuous path, so it is implausible that it goes in and out of existence. In short, we
       apparently have an example of motion without velocity. This may not be an outright
       counterexample to the physicists’ analysis of velocity, but it is surely odd. The heuristic helps to lead us to a puzzling case.

In response to the problem of multiple candidates for F in the definite description ‘the
F’, one may settle instead for the indefinite description, ‘a(n) F’. Then any of the candidates should do: all that matters is their existence, not their uniqueness. But we may
still be able to mount our assault from the other side: even indefinite descriptions are
in trouble when their existence presuppositions fail. This brings me to a closely related
heuristic.

1.2 See Indefinite Descriptions in Neon Lights
A philosophical thesis, or an analysis, that involves an indefinite description ‘ … a(n) F … ’
presupposes that there is at least one F. Ask whether there are, or could be, no F’s. All of the
cases we have seen faced a challenge of this kind, so even replacing their definite descriptions with indefinite descriptions would not get them out of the woods.

1.3 Exposing a Definite or Indefinite Description by Paraphrase
Sometimes a problematic definite or indefinite description can come in disguise, and
when it does, it is harder to see any neon lights, because one does not actually see the word
‘the’ or ‘a(n)’. Still, it may be lurking in the background, to be revealed in its neon glory by
paraphrase.
   Example. To maximize a quantity means to achieve THE greatest amount of that
quantity. The paraphrase makes the definite description explicit. But we can also speak
of a function that has multiple maxima, many points at which it achieves its maximum
value. Think of y = cos x—​while in a sense it has one maximum (namely, 1), in another
sense it has many maxima (at x = ± 2nπ, n = 0, 1, 2, … ). In the latter sense, each of these
points is A maximum, the indefinite description made explicit. The same can be said
for minimizing a quantity, and minima, mutatis mutandis. But whether we speak of
the single maximal/​m inimal value attained by a quantity, or the many ways in which
it may be attained, one cannot maximize/​m inimize a quantity that has no maximum/​
minimum.

=== p. 353 ===

   For instance, according to decision theory, rationality requires you to maximize
expected utility. It does not seem problematic for decision theory if there are multiple ways
to do so in a given situation. Consider Buridan’s Ass, who can maximize expected utility
by eating either of two equidistant hay bales; either way, it will achieve THE maximum
amount of expected utility. On the other hand, cases in which there is an infinite sequence
of actions of ever-​greater expected utility are problematic. Pollock’s (1983) ‘Ever-​better
wine’ provides an example: the longer you wait to open the bottle of wine, the better it gets.
When should you open it? We can specify the case so that any time is too soon; yet never
opening it is the worst option of all. There is no sense in which you can maximize expected
utility here.
   Similarly, a naïve version of consequentialism says that one is morally required to perform an action that has maximally good consequences (in some sense or other); but one
cannot if there are actions that yield better and better consequences without end. Moving
to a higher level of abstraction, some functions have no maximum at all—​those that
increase towards an asymptote without ever reaching it, or that have no bound, or whose
range is an open set.

1.4 Indeterminacy
So far, we have looked at cases where ‘the F’ does not have a unique referent, because there
is determinately more than one F, or determinately none; and cases where ‘a(n) F’ does not
have a referent, because there are determinately none. A different kind of problem arises
when it is indeterminate how many F’s there are, and in particular, it is indeterminate
whether there is one, or indeterminate whether there is at least one. Similarly, the word ‘the’
suggests that there is a determinate answer to a relevant question, or a fact of the matter of
the bearer of some relevant property. But there might be indeterminacy regarding these
things.
   Example. Philosophers of biology ask questions such as ‘What is the function of the
frog’s eye?’ And various answers seem reasonable: ‘to detect flies’, ‘to detect dark spots’, ‘to
detect food’, and so on. But perhaps there is no determinate answer to the question—​no
determinate function of the frog’s eye.
   Example. What is the right thing to do when one faces a moral dilemma? Parfit (1984)
argues that often it is indeterminate. It may even be indeterminate whether there is a right
thing to do.
   We will encounter indeterminacy again in our next heuristic, which has a number of
points of contact with the previous ones.

       2. Arbitrariness, and How to Respond
                When Faced with It

When a philosophical position has the form ‘… the F … ’, or … a(n) F …’ and there are multiple F’s, it may be permissible just to pick one of them. For example, if there are many best

=== p. 354 ===

of all possible worlds, maybe God can create any one of them. But perhaps choosing one F
out of the many candidates will be arbitrary in an unacceptable way. God’s creating one out
of multiple worlds tied for first place in the goodness ordering would violate the principle
of sufficient reason. For that reason, when Leibniz thought that God created the best of all
possible worlds, he really meant the, not a!
   Onwards to the next heuristic, or better, set of heuristics. They begin with problems arising out of arbitrariness, and then offer a number of ways of responding to these problems.
   The sorites paradox furnishes a classic example:

    A grain of sand is not a heap; two grains of sand is not a heap; for all n, if n grains of sand is
    not a heap, then neither is n+1 grains; therefore there are no heaps.

Sure, you can arbitrarily stipulate that there is a particular grain of sand at which a heap
suddenly comes into being—​say, the seventeenth. But that’s exactly the problem: it’s arbitrary. Why that choice, rather than the sixteenth, or eighteenth, or other nearby choices?
   Arbitrary choices are familiar from daily life. On what side of the road should we drive?
This seems to be entirely arbitrary. Some other choices are not entirely arbitrary, but partly
so. Where should we set speed limits, or the voting age, or the drinking age? Some settings
would be far too high or far too low, but still there is a range of reasonable settings, and
choosing one from the range is arbitrary. A sign of the arbitrariness is that different societies choose differently, and sometimes a given society will revise its settings over time. But
we are typically not troubled by their arbitrariness, for it is not arbitrary that some setting
be made, as opposed to none.
   On the other hand, arbitrary choices are often regarded as fatal to philosophical positions that have to make them. The classical interpretation of probability, with its notorious principle of indifference, and Carnap’s (1952) logical interpretation of probability, have
been widely thought to be killed, or at least seriously wounded, by the apparently arbitrary
choices that they force upon us—​t he suitable partition of ‘equipossible’ events in the former
case, or the setting of an index of inductive caution, λ, in the latter.
   More broadly, arbitrariness can be a sign of a flaw in a philosophical position. It is forced
to make a choice; but why that choice, when it apparently could just as easily have made
another one? The choice would seem to have no force—​normative, or semantic, or otherwise. How could it be binding—​rationally, or morally, or semantically, or what have you?
And it would seem not to line up with a joint of nature, or of metaphysics, or of semantics,
or what have you.
   A good case study, which will showcase several techniques, involves Lewis’s (1973a,
1994) analysis of laws of nature. Start with all of the true theories of the world. Some are very
simple, but not informative—​for example, the theory whose sole axiom is that everything
is self-​identical. Some are very informative, but not simple—​for example, the collective
(true) contents of Wikipedia. Some achieve a better balance of simplicity and informativeness than others. According to Lewis, the laws of nature are the theorems of the true theory
of the world that best balances simplicity and informativeness—​for short, the best system.
But he acknowledges the possibility that there may be more than one reasonable way to
trade off simplicity against informativeness. Different standards for balancing simplicity
and informativeness may yield different theories as the winner of the Lewisian competition. What, then, are the laws? We could simply choose one set of standards, and insist that

=== p. 355 ===

it dictates what the laws are. But why that set, rather than another set? This choice threatens
to be arbitrary.
   More generally, a problem arises for a philosophical position when there are multiple
candidates for some job description appealed to by that position, all apparently equally
good, and choosing any one of them over the others seems arbitrary.
   But there are various possible responses. I will classify them into three kinds:

   1) Symmetry-​breaking responses (playing favourites): all candidates are equal, but
      some are more equal than others.
   2) Symmetry-​preserving responses (even-​handed): all candidates really are equal, but
      we can deal with that.
   3) Hybrid responses: first some symmetry-​  breaking; then, symmetry-​     preserving
      among the candidates that remain.

2.1 Symmetry-​Breaking Responses
2.1.1 One of the Candidates is Salient, or Privileged
The first response is to insist that one of the candidates stands out after all, so choosing it
over the others is not arbitrary after all. I do not have an account of what makes a candidate
salient or privileged, but I do have some rules of thumb. In daily life, when numbers are
involved, natural numbers are usually salient. For example, no society imposes a drinking age of 18½ years old. Some natural numbers are especially salient—​for example, 1 and
multiples of powers of 10 often stand out from their neighbours. I bet you have never seen a
speed limit of 103 km/​h! In daily life and in philosophy, extremal cases are usually salient.
So too are points of symmetry, and they can provide symmetry-​breakers! In doing so, they
can answer charges of arbitrariness. One candidate stands out: the symmetrically placed
one. Consider our dividing a pie that you and I both want—​if we don’t agree on the 50/​50
split, what could we agree on?
   And in philosophy more specifically, one candidate for a job description may be privileged in virtue of being more fundamental than its rivals—​for examples, its rivals are
reducible to that candidate, or supervene on it, but not vice versa. Then it may be appropriate to thump the table in favour of that candidate. Or a candidate may be privileged, but not
for any deep metaphysical reason. It may be so merely in virtue of contingent facts about
our linguistic practices, for instance.
   I take Lewis to have been sympathetic to a ‘privileged candidate’ response for his account
of lawhood: that there are privileged standards for balancing simplicity and informativeness. We could begin to flesh out this idea—​for example, by considering the lengths of
descriptions of the world given by various competing axiomatized theories, couched in
some canonical language in which all predicates correspond to natural properties. Some
authors have similarly attempted to rehabilitate the principle of indifference by regarding
certain partitions to be privileged—​for instance, those that are maximally fine grained
(Elga’s 2004 ‘predicaments’), or that are invariant under certain fundamental transformations (Jaynes 2003).

=== p. 356 ===

   While Lewis does not say in his writings what would make a balancing-​standard
privileged, still less what the privileged standard is, Elga and Jaynes offer more details
about how privileged partitions are generated. One might offer the privileged-​c andidate
response as a mere existential commitment—​t hat there is a privileged candidate, and
to leave it at that—​but one might also do more to identify the candidate. The former
approach might work especially well in tandem with epistemicism about the candidate: for some reason its identity is obscure to us or unknowable by us. (One hopes at
least for more details about what this reason is, lest we be saddled with epistemicism
about it too!) The poster child here is Williamson’s (1994) approach to vagueness.
According to it, there is a fact of the matter of which additional grain of sand turns a
non-​heap into a heap (thanks to our linguistic practices), but we can never know what
grain it is.

2.1.2 Go Subjectivist/​Pragmatist
The next response runs: ‘You get to choose the candidate that you want—​it’s your interests that you want to serve!’ This response may be plausible when the relevant job description involves subjects, for example rational agents. Subjective Bayesians about probability,
for example, are often untroubled by the seeming arbitrariness in the choice of priors. The
response might also allow or explain no-​fault disagreements between different subjects.
But it is surely implausible for the laws of nature.

2.1.3 Go Conventionalist
‘We get to stipulate the winning candidate; having done so, we agree on it thereafter.’ (Note
that arbitrariness of a choice was a key part of Lewis’s (1969) definition of that choice being
a matter of convention.) This response works for some of the laws of society, up to a point—​
for example, the side of the road on which one drives, the setting of speed limits, the voting
age, and drinking age. Again, this response is not so promising for the laws of nature—​we
don’t get to decide what they are. Some philosophical problems should not be farmed out to
sociologists.

2.1.4 ‘Nature is Kind’
‘The multiplicity problem is not really a problem, because however we reasonably
make the arbitrary choice, there will be the same clear winner. While there might in
principle be disagreement among the multiple best candidates for some job description, in fact such disagreement will not arise. Think of this as an empirical bet that
nature is kind to us, and will see to it that all these candidates agree.’ Lewis favoured
this response regarding the laws of nature. He hoped that one theory would win the
Lewisian competition so decisively that it would not matter exactly how simplicity
and strength were traded off, within reasonable limits. This response is perhaps not
so effective for an analysis of lawhood that is intended to hold in other possible worlds,
including those in which nature is unkind; but perhaps our concept of lawhood would
not apply in such a world.

=== p. 357 ===

2.2 Symmetry-​Preserving Responses
2.2.1 Pluralism
‘All of the candidates are right. Each provides a legitimate meaning, a reasonable explication of an inexact concept or a reasonable precisification of a vague concept.’ This may be a
good response when the arbitrariness at issue is purely semantic.
   At the other end of the spectrum, we have eliminativism.

2.2.2 Eliminativism
‘None of the candidates are right. The multiplicity of candidates serves to show that the
original concept is incoherent, and should be eliminated.’ This may be a good way to bring
out problems with a concept that was already in dispute, as ‘law of nature’ is to some extent.
But there is a danger of this response ‘proving too much’. Most of our concepts are vague,
and susceptible to sorites reasoning. We may be left with very few of them if we wield this
response too enthusiastically. To be sure, however, even ordinary objects are under threat
from such reasoning by eliminativists such as Unger (1979) and van Inwagen (1990).
   Somewhere between the extremes of this response and the previous one, we have the following reponse:

2.2.3 It’s a Terminological Matter
‘It’s not that any given candidate is right or wrong. Proponents of different candidates
are merely taking different stands on a terminological issue.’ Again, this may be a good
response when the arbitrariness at issue is purely semantic. But of course the setting of the
side of the road one drives on, speed limits, the drinking age, or voting age is not a terminological matter.

2.2.4 It’s Indeterminate
‘There is no fact of the matter of what the right candidate is. Rather, it is indeterminate.’
This could be a good explanation of why the leading candidates are tied; or their being tied
could explain why the matter is indeterminate.

2.2.5 Supervaluate
‘What’s true on all ways of making the arbitrary choice is determinately true. What’s
false on all ways is determinately false. Everything else is indeterminate.’ According to
Lewis (1973a), the laws are those theorems common to all of the candidates for the best
theories. On this approach, as he later (1994) concedes, there is the threat that there will
be little or no overlap between the best theories, in which case there will be few laws or
none. We might hope that nature is at least a bit kind, guaranteeing a decent amount of
overlap.

=== p. 358 ===

  Recall the problem for Stalnaker’s account of counterfactuals: that there may be ties for
which antecedent-​world is nearest. He later (1981) responds by supervaluating over the
candidates.

2.2.6 Subvaluate
‘What’s true/​false on all ways of making the arbitrary choice is determinately true/​false.
Everything else is true and false.’ On this approach, there is the threat that there will be
too many laws. And some of them may be highly disjunctive, piecing together regularities
favoured by one best system with those favoured by another, and yielding something that is
not simple by any standard.
   Here, and in following pluralism by eliminativism, we encounter another mini-​
heuristic: do the opposite. Take some approach to a problem, and follow the opposite
approach, dual approach, or complementary approach. (Suitably cautioned by my first
heuristic, this assumes there is exactly one such approach!) For example, replace universal
quantifiers by existential quantifiers, necessities by possibilities, conjunctions by disjunctions, or replace parameter values by values that are in some sense complementary. In this
case, subvaluationism can be regarded as the opposite approach to supervaluationism.
   And even here we face some arbitrariness, now at the meta-​level. How do we justify
supervaluating and subvaluating over other ways of meta-​valuating, quantifying over the
ways of choosing candidates? To be sure, supervaluating and subvaluating are salient, in
virtue of being extreme, the two endpoints of a spectrum of ways of valuating: what’s true
on at least one way of making the choice; what’s true on at least two ways; what’s true on at
least three ways; … what’s true on all ways of making the choice. But salient too is ‘majority-​
rules-​valuating’, which appeals to a point of symmetry, the midpoint: what’s true on more
than half of the ways of making the arbitrary choice is true; what’s false on more than half of
the ways is false.4 (What’s true on exactly half the ways we might treat as indeterminate, or
we might treat as true and false.) Moreover, how are we to choose between supervaluating
and subvaluating, when they are equally salient? This choice threatens to be arbitrary. A big
debate begins here, turning on considerations that militate in favour of one approach or the
other, and this is not the place—​or even a place—​to enter it.

2.3 Hybrid Responses
These responses combine some symmetry-​breaking response (to cull some of the candidates while leaving others live) with some symmetry-​preserving response (to treat those
that remain even-​handedly). One might insist, for instance, that some (but not all) of the
candidates are privileged, then supervaluate over those that remain. Or one might consider
all of the candidates that are subjectively chosen by some agent or other, and subvaluate

  4 If there are only finitely many candidates, it’s clear what ‘more than half’ of them means—​we just

count them all and divide by 2! But if there are infinitely many candidates, it’s less clear. We will need
some sort of measure over the candidates. But which? Arbitrariness—​dare I say it—​looms!

=== p. 359 ===

over those. And so on. This yields many hybrid responses, mixing and matching techniques from the previous two categories.
   I have presented many ways of responding to arbitrariness. Which should be used in a
given case? Is that arbitrary?! How should we respond?! Different ways are appropriate for
different cases, and I don’t have a heuristic for deciding that (yet). I suggest that where possible, one should look to the symmetry-​breaking strategies first, and only when they fail to
leave just one candidate standing, look to the symmetry-​preserving strategies over those
that remain. But this still leaves open many possible responses, which will need to be handled on a case-​by-​case basis. Fear not—​I have no aspirations to turn students into philosophical automata. There will always be an important place for good philosophical judgement.
   So much for arbitrariness. It is continuous with the next set of closely related heuristics,
which I will put under one big heading.

                                 3. Continuity

3.1 Continuity Reasoning
Let’s revisit the sorites paradox from a different perspective. You can draw a line in the
sand, so to speak, and claim that there is a particular grain at which a heap suddenly comes
into being—​say, the seventeenth. But it seems absurd that such a small change in one
respect, the difference between 16 and 17 grains, should result in such a large difference in
another respect, the non-​existence or existence of a heap. Note that the problem here is not
that of arbitrariness, justifying why the line should be drawn there rather than elsewhere.
Rather, the problem is that there shouldn’t be a line at all.
   This is an example of continuity reasoning. Roughly, the pattern is that one variable is
a function of another, and small changes in the former should lead to small changes in
the latter. Such reasoning is often part of common sense. We are surprised, for instance,
when we are told that we share 98.4 per cent of our DNA with chimpanzees. How can
such a small change in genotype lead to such a large change in phenotype? More generally, discontinuities may induce some of the discomfort that arbitrariness may cause us.
Why should cases that are similar in some relevant respect give rise to such dissimilarity
in another respect? And where there is a discontinuous ‘jump’ in some function of interest or importance to us, both the placement and the size of the jump may seem disconcertingly arbitrary.
   It should be stressed how much continuity reasoning underwrites inductive inference.
We don’t just think that the unobserved resembles the observed (in suitable respects): we
also think that the nearby unobserved closely resembles the observed, and typically the
more nearby, the closer the resemblance (other things being equal). The world mostly
does not deliver abrupt changes; properties tend to change gradually over space and time.
Consider how painting restoration, or computer programs for reducing noise on photographs, operate on this assumption: where there is information on only particular parts of
a picture, the default assumption is that nearby parts will be the same, or similar. Induction
would be stymied if things systematically underwent sudden jolts. And when it is, that just
adds to our discomfort!

=== p. 360 ===

   Continuity reasoning is also common and fertile in philosophy. Sider (2002) poses the
problem that certain conceptions of Hell are incompatible with a traditional doctrine
about God. According to these conceptions, after we die, we either go to Heaven or Hell;
some of us go to Heaven and some go to Hell; Heaven is much better than Hell; and God
decides who goes where. The concern is that any plausible criterion for his decision will
admit of borderline cases. As a result, there will be some people who just make the cut and
go to Heaven, and other very similar people who just miss out. Now Sider appeals to a continuity premise: ‘the proportionality of justice prohibits very unequal treatment of persons
who are very similar in relevant respects’ (59). He argues that one cannot square such treatment with God being just.
   One may argue in a similar way for vegetarianism being morally required. Clearly we
should not be omnivores—​for example, cannibalism is surely morally prohibited, and for
that matter so is eating chimpanzees, most of us would agree.5 If we are meat-​eaters at all,
we must have some criterion for deciding which animals it is permissible to eat and which
not—​as it might be, intelligence or sentience. Again this criterion will admit of borderline cases. Some animals will just make the cut (as it were) for being off limits for eating,
and others will just miss out. And now comes the continuity premise: animals that are so
similar to each other in relevant respects should not be given such disparate treatment.
Conclusion: all animals are off limits.
   We could argue along similar lines against the death penalty. Whatever criterion we use
for drawing a line on the basis of severity of crime, beyond which perpetrators are executed, their punishment would be strikingly different from that of similar offenders just
short of the line. Indeed, there is a whole class of ‘slippery slope’ arguments that have been
deployed against euthanasia, abortion, gun control, and so on, which in each case appeal to
a continuity intuition that similar cases should be treated similarly.
   Of course, there are ways of fighting back. For starters, continuity reasoning can be run
in both directions. We can equally ‘show’ that any collection of grains of sand, however
small, is a heap by starting with a paradigm case of a heap, removing grains of sand one
by one, and insisting that no single removal could turn a heap into a non-​heap. The very
same continuity premise that underwrites an argument for vegetarianism could just as
well underwrite an argument for omnivorism. And eventually some crackpot is bound to
appeal to continuity reasoning to argue for the far more widespread use of the death penalty, perhaps even supplanting fines for driving on the wrong side of the road. Beware of
the slippery slope that the unbridled use of continuity reasoning could send us down! We
can drive continuity reasoning in two directions—​as we might say, left-​to-​right (→) and
right-​to-​left (←). There is again the threat of arbitrariness: why should one direction be
favoured over the other? Yet if we drive the reasoning in both directions, we will arrive at a
contradiction (→←).
   Moreover, continuity-​based arguments must appeal to some sort of metric, at least
loosely specified—​some measure of ‘distance’ according to which we can judge roughly
how close entities or cases are to each other. (It need not be numerical, but it must be more
than merely a comparative ordering.) Disputes might arise over the choice of metric, and
favouring one metric over another might appear to be arbitrary.

         I bracket extreme cases in which one’s very survival is at stake, which may not be so clear.

=== p. 361 ===

   And whatever the metric, sometimes discontinuities are acceptable, and even required.
My favourite function is the Alan Hájek function. It is the function from people to {0, 1} that
is my characteristic function: it assigns 1 to me, and 0 to everyone else. Offhand, this function should be discontinuous, whatever metric we impose to capture how similar people
are to one another. It doesn’t matter how close you are to me according to such a metric: you
still get a 0, and only I get a 1!

3.2 Drawing Inspiration from the Mathematics of Continuous
     Functions
Let’s look to mathematics for a better understanding of continuity, through its treatment of
continuous functions. The informal definition of such a function is that small changes in
its input value result in correspondingly small changes in its output value. More formally,
the function f(x) is continuous at c if

                                          lim f ( x ) = f (c ) .
                                          x →c

This presupposes an underlying metric, as becomes clear when the limit is given its usual ‘ε
… δ’ definition.
   We may generalize this for a function between two topological spaces: a function f: X →
Y is continuous if the pre-​image of every open set of Y is open in X. We may think of this as
a kind of ‘supervaluating’ over all metrics, preserving what is structurally common to all
continuous functions, whatever the underlying metric. This may go some way to allaying
the concern, raised in section 3, that the choice of any particular metric is arbitrary.6 Weber
and Colyvan (2010) give a topological version of the sorites paradox. Kelly (1996) appeals
to the topological definition of continuity to characterize empirical methods, regarding
possible data streams as infinite sequences of discrete inputs, and open sets as propositions
that are empirically verifiable by finite sequences of such inputs.
   We philosophers can outsource a lot of our problems, and let practitioners of other fields
do a lot of the hard work for us. In this case, various beautiful theorems involving continuity that mathematicians have proven can do philosophical work. Start with the intermediate value theorem:

   If f is a real-​valued continuous function on the interval [a, b], and u is a number between f(a)
   and f(b), then there is a c ∈ [a, b] such that f(c) = u.

The underlying idea is simple. Think of a continuous function as one that you can trace
without your pen ever leaving the page. Start at its value at the beginning of a closed interval, and trace it until you reach its value at the end. Along the way you must have crossed
every intermediate value between those two endpoint values—​in particular, any designated intermediate value.

                                      Thanks to Mark Colyvan here.

=== p. 362 ===

  We can use the intermediate value theorem to argue that at any time there must be a
pair of antipodal points on the Earth that have the same temperature (and pressure too!)
More philosophically, Joyce (1998) appeals to this theorem in his argument for probabilism,
the thesis that rational credences obey probability theory. He shows that if your credences
violate probability theory, then they are accuracy-​dominated: there exists a probability
function that is closer to the truth in every possible world. The intermediate value theorem
supports a key step in the argument.
  Or consider Brouwer’s fixed point theorem:

   Any continuous function f from a closed interval of the real line to itself has a fixed point—​a
   point x0 such that

                                             f ( x0 ) = x0

Arntzenius and Maudlin (2010) ingeniously invoke this theorem to resolve a paradox concerning time travel. An old-​fashioned camera takes a picture of a developed black-​and-​
white film—​a ‘negative’—​that leaves a time machine. The picture is developed, and the
negative put in the time machine, sent back to the time at which the picture is to be taken,
and leaves the time machine then. The trouble is that a negative has the complementary
shades to the object of which it is a picture—​a dark grey object has a light grey negative,
and so on—​so the story appears to be contradictory. But there is a neat solution. Represent
the mapping from a shade of grey to its complementary shade as a continuous function on
[0, 1], with 0 representing pure black and 1 representing pure white. By Brouwer’s theorem,
it has a fixed point: a shade of grey that is its own complement. So if the developed film is
uniformly that shade, the story is consistent!
   I adverted to a famous theorem involving continuity in my argument that there can
be motion without velocity: the existence of an everywhere-​continuous function that is
nowhere-​differentiable. Interestingly, the Weierstrass function is the limit of an infinite
sequence of functions, each of which is everywhere-​differentiable. The anomalous behav-iour of the function kicks in suddenly ‘at infinity’, in this sense behaving nothing like the
functions that approach it.

3.3 Discontinuity at Infinity
This is an instance of another philosophically important phenomenon, which we might
call discontinuity at infinity. This is not the place to characterize this technical notion rig-ourously, but roughly it involves the failure of a natural extension to the definition of continuity to cases where we can make sense of a function’s behaviour at infinity:

                                      limxn →∞ f ( xn ) = f (∞ )

where <xn> is an increasing sequence. It could be a sequence of ordered functions, with
f representing a binary property that another function could have or not. For example,
everywhere-​differentiability of a function could be represented by a 1, its failure represented

=== p. 363 ===

by a 0; the Weierstrass function scores a 0, even though it is the limit of a sequence of functions each of which scores a 1.
   Again, we recognize discontinuity at infinity in various philosophical examples. It figures in certain paradoxical decision problems that involve infinity in some way. Nover and
Hájek’s (2004) Pasadena game has a pathological (indeed, undefined) expected utility that
is the limit of a sequence of perfectly well-​behaved expected utilities. Arntzenius, Elga,
and Hawthorne’s (2004) ‘Satan’s Apple’ involves an infinite sequential choice problem that
becomes paradoxical only when the limit at infinity is reached. And Pollock’s problem of
when to open the Ever-​better wine displays a similar discontinuity at infinity: the option of
waiting forever and never opening the wine is discontinuously worse than all of the options
that approach it. Bartha, Barker, and Hájek (2013) characterize in more detail decision problems that are discontinuous at infinity, and discuss some methods for approaching them.
   While I applaud using mathematical theorems to support philosophical points (and
I have just done so myself), we should keep in mind Benacerraf’s (1967) caution about deriving philosophical conclusions from mathematical theorems: When somebody purports to
establish a philosophical thesis with a mathematical theorem, they must have assumed some
philosophical premises. In fact, keeping this caution in mind is a good philosophical heuristic in its own right! Examples of apparent violations of Benacerraf’s cautionary words
include:

  • Putnam (1980): the Löwenheim-​Skolem theorem shows that realism is false.
  • Lucas (1961) and Penrose (1989): Gödel’s theorem shows that minds are not machines.
  • Various people: the Dutch book theorem shows that credences are rationally required
    to be probabilities.

None of these theorems establish what they are purported to without the aid of ancillary
philosophical premises. Spelling them out clarifies what the associated arguments really
should be, and in doing so fixes targets for further debate. I, for example, assumed that a
particle could in principle move according to a Weierstrass function.

3.4 Continuity Reasoning in Philosophical Methodology
But let’s continue with continuity reasoning, this time applied at a ‘meta’-​level. Continuity
considerations can be applied to philosophical methodology itself. Consider Priest’s (1994)
Principle of Uniform Solution:

   If two paradoxes are of the same kind, then they should have the same kind of solution.

Think of paradoxes as situated in ‘paradox space’, and their solutions as situated in ‘solution
space’. The Principle can be regarded as a requirement that nearby paradoxes should be
mapped to nearby solutions.
   Again, we may ask: what is the appropriate metric—​when are two paradoxes of the same
kind? Smith (2000) presses this concern, arguing that two paradoxes may be similar at one
level of abstraction, while being dissimilar at another. And is discontinuity sometimes
acceptable—​two paradoxes of the same kind having quite different solutions? I suggest

=== p. 364 ===

that it is. Think of a limiting case: the very same paradox may get two quite different solutions, both adequate. (They may target different premises, for starters.) All the more, then,
it would seem that two nearby paradoxes could have two quite different solutions, both
adequate. Note that the argument that I have just given itself invokes a kind of continuity
reasoning!
   Notice how similar the Principle of Uniform Solution is to van Fraassen’s (1989, p. 236)
‘Symmetry Requirement’:

   Problems which are essentially the same must receive essentially the same solution.

More generally, I think that the symmetry requirement is kindred with continuity reasoning. Both are useful heuristics. Jaynes (2003), for instance, appeals to the symmetry
requirement in his defence of the principle of indifference, applying the principle to transformations of a probability problem that leave it essentially unchanged.

3.5 Continuity and Modal Induction
Earlier I emphasized the important role that continuity reasoning can play in induction,
ampliatively inferring a conclusion about the actual world from a premise about this world.
Continuity reasoning can also play an important role in what we might call modal induction: ampliatively inferring a conclusion about the space of possible worlds from a premise
about this space.
   In my (2014) I offer various methods for showing that something, call it X, is possible. One such method can be regarded as employing continuity reasoning. It follows this
schema:

   1) Almost-​X is possible.
   2) The small difference between almost-​X and X makes no difference to possibility.

Conclusion: X is possible.
   Chalmers (1996) argues along these lines that physical-​duplicate zombies are possible (beings that have no conscious experiences, but that are physically identical to normal agents that have conscious experiences). Functional-​duplicate zombies (functionally
identical to normal agents), he argues firstly, are possible; and moving from functional-​
duplicates to physical-​duplicates will not make a difference to what’s possible.

                       4. Mismatch of Degrees

It’s a problem for a putative analysis of some concept, C, if C comes in degrees that vary
continuously, while the analysans has discontinuous ‘jumps’, or vice versa. More generally,
it’s a problem if there is a mismatch of the degrees of the analysandum and the analysans.
A notable case of this is when one side of a putative analysis comes in degrees, while the

=== p. 365 ===

other does not. This in turn may involve a mismatch of vagueness, one side admitting borderline cases, the other not.

4.1 The Analysandum Does Not Come in Degrees, the
     Analysans Does
Berkeley was fond of saying that to exist is to be perceived. (For some reason, he was particularly fond of saying it in Latin.) Now, existence does not come in degrees—​it is the
ultimate on/​off property or attribute. But offhand, being perceived does. Think of perceiving a table in a room that is initially totally dark, slowly turning the lights up using a
‘dimmer’ dial. Or think of things on the periphery of your visual field. Moreover, these
provide borderline cases of being perceived; but it is hard to make sense of borderline
cases of existence.
   To be sure, we might reply on behalf of Berkeley that ‘being perceived’ is a threshold
notion—​for example, perceiving the table suddenly begins at a certain minimal light level.
But that introduces a disquieting discontinuity, and an apparent arbitrariness in the setting of the threshold. Then again, we might use one of the many responses to arbitrariness
that I detailed in section 2.1, so I do not claim this objection is decisive. Berkeley himself
replied that everything that exists is perceived by God; and presumably he would add that
God’s perceptions don’t come in degrees.
   Personal identity seems to be ‘all or nothing’, yet various analyses of it involve things that
come in degrees (e.g. psychological or bodily continuity—​not the same sense of ‘continuity’ as before!). But—​another useful philosopher’s technique—​one person’s modus ponens
is another’s modus tollens. And Parfit (1984) tollenses where others ponens, arguing that
personal identity indeed comes in degrees. (If it does, my earlier insouciance about the discontinuity of the Alan Hájek function may need revisiting.)
   Now turn things around (another philosophical heuristic in its own right!).

4.2 The Analysandum Comes in Degrees, the Analysans Does
     Not7
Hume (1748/​1902) defines a miracle as a violation of a law of nature. But arguably, being a
miracle comes in degrees, whereas being a law of nature does not, and thus violating a law
of nature does not. Some miracles are more miraculous than others. Arguably, a resurrection would genuinely violate a law of nature. (If not, then Hume’s definition is in even more
trouble, since this about as miraculous an event as any attested to.) But other miracles need

  7 If you or your students have trouble remembering which is which, here is a mnemonic: the

analysandum is the dumb thing (the concept as it is found in the wild, pre-​reflection), and the
analysans is the answer (as provided by some thoughtful philosopher). I gather that others have hit
upon this mnemonic before me, including David Sosa.

=== p. 366 ===

not. For example, the Red Sea parting on Moses’ command need not. Consistent with the
laws, one water molecule after another could spontaneously move this way or that way,
collectively constituting the parting of the sea. To be sure, the event is extraordinarily
improbable, given the laws. Perhaps, then, a miracle should somehow be defined in terms of
improbability instead. After all, improbability comes in degrees, and is thus fit to match the
degrees of the analysandum.
   According to the von Mises (1957)/​Church (1940) analysis of randomness, a sequence
is random iff every recursively specified subsequence has the same relative frequency of
every attribute. If this analysis is unfamiliar to you, and indeed if even the terminology in
the analysans is unfamiliar to you, so much the better—​t he power of this heuristic will be
revealed all the more. For even if the right-​hand-​side makes you glaze over, you know that
universal quantification does not come in degrees. (The same is true of existential quantification.) Either it is (entirely) true that every blah-​blah has yadda-​yadda, or it is (entirely) false;
the analysans does not come in degrees. But surely randomness comes in degrees. Suppose
we toss a coin indefinitely. Consider interspersing the completely random sequence (say)

    H       H   T   H       T       T       T   T    H…

with the obviously non-​random alternating sequence

    H   T       H   T   H       T       H       T…

to yield:

    H   H       H   T   T       H       H       T   T   H   T   T   T   H   T   T   H…

Surely this resulting sequence is partially random. But without paying any attention to the
details of the von Mises/​Church analysis, you know that it cannot deliver that verdict. (In
fact, its verdict is that the sequence is non-​random—​entirely so!)
   This account of randomness was intended to undergird von Mises’ frequentist account
of (objective) probabilities: they are relative frequencies in random sequences of trials.
Philosophers now mostly agree that frequentism provides a bad analysis of probability (see
my 1996 and 2009 for many arguments for this conclusion). But a bad analysis can provide
a good heuristic. It will typically not be a total failure—​it will typically get a wide range
of central cases right. (If it did not, it presumably would never see the light of day.) While
failing to give necessary and sufficient conditions for its analysandum, it may nevertheless
usually be a reliable guide to the analysandum, reliable enough to serve as a useful way to
think about the associated concept.
   This brings us to the next heuristic—​or better, set of heuristics.

    5. Replace Non-​E xtensional Notions with
            Extensional Surrogates

Kahneman and Tversky (1982) have famously contended that we are bad at reasoning
probabilistically—​w itness our tendency to neglect base rates or to commit the conjunction

=== p. 367 ===

fallacy on various probability questions.8 For example, people are prone to think that if
they test positive for a disease when given a test that is 95% reliable—​it has a 5% chance of
giving false positives and a 5% chance of giving false negatives—​t he chance that they have
the disease is 95%. This neglects the prior probability (‘base rate’) that they have the disease in the first place, which may render that chance much smaller (or indeed, higher). The
importance of this prior probability is obvious when we consider an extreme case, in which
a given person has no chance of having the disease; then, a positive test result is guaranteed
to be a false positive. (By analogy, if a man gets a positive result on a pregnancy test, it’s
obvious what he should conclude!) By the way, witness the heuristic power of considering
extreme cases, which I emphasize in my (2014).
    Gigerenzer (1991) has found that if probability problems are rephrased in terms of frequencies, we fare much better. This is not to say that probabilities are frequencies (they
are not): just that frequentist thinking is a good heuristic for probabilistic thinking. So,
translate a probability problem into a parallel frequency problem, or if you like, pretend that
probabilities are frequencies. Imagine, say, that you are one of 10,000 people who have taken
the test, and that it showed positive. Now suppose you learn that the base rate of the disease
is 1%, so only 100 people in the population have the disease, and 9,900 don’t (according to the
pretence); 95 of the former group (truly) showed positive, and 495 of the latter group (falsely)
showed positive. That is, less than 1/​5 of the people in your shoes actually have the disease.
That should be comforting. Frequentist thinking makes the point intuitive and vivid.
    Inspired by this, I propose a related heuristic: replace intensional notions with extensional surrogates. An intensional notion is one for which truth value may fail to be preserved under replacement of co-​referential expressions; an extensional notion is one for
which truth value is preserved.9 I submit that extensional notions are easier to think about
and to deal with; intensional notions are more opaque to us. The typical cases that I will
consider are ones in which we begin with a modal notion, and replace it with some quantifi-cational notion. But the heuristic covers other cases as well.
    In offering this heuristic I am not suggesting that a given extensional replaceans needs
to provide an analysis or reduction of the original intensional replaceandum. The heuristic is entirely analytically and metaphysically innocent. I am suggesting only that there is
heuristic value in reasoning with the extensional surrogate; it is a proposal for guiding the
mind. To be sure, one hopes that the surrogate resembles the original closely enough that
the mind does not go badly wrong when so guided, at least in typical or important cases. If
the surrogate does provide a genuine analysis or reduction (in which case calling it a ‘surrogate’ undersells it), so much the better.
    Some examples are well entrenched in philosophical thinking:

   • Replace talk of necessity or possibility with talk of what’s true at all or some (accessible)
     possible worlds.
   • Replace talk of counterfactuals with talk of what’s true at the nearest antecedent
     worlds.

    This section benefited from discussion with Sharon Berry, Yooav Isaacs, Hanti Lin, Daniel Nolan,
and Wolfgang Schwarz.
    I follow the standard definition here, although it will not be important to adhere to it strictly.
(That would hardly be in the spirit of my project!) In fact, soon I will loosen up the heuristic.

=== p. 368 ===

Here at least, most philosophers think that the extensional surrogates really are equivalent
to the original intensional notions. In some other cases, the alleged equivalence is controversial, but the heuristic value is there nonetheless. For example:

   • Replace talk of indeterminacy with talk of what’s true on some but not all admissible
     precisifications, and replace talk of what’s determinately true/​false with talk of what’s
     true/​false in all admissible precisifications.
   • Replace indicative conditionals with material conditionals. (Material conditionals are
     extensional since they are truth functional, and the extension of a sentence is its truth value.)

Or perhaps better is a two-​step replacement:

   • Replace indicative conditionals with strict conditionals, and replace them with material conditionals true in all possible worlds.

The first step replaces an intensional notion with another intensional notion, but one that
has a simple extensional translation.
  Then there are analyses whose failure is relatively uncontroversial nowadays, yet still
they may be useful ways to think about the relevant concepts, if only as an act of pretence:

   • Replace talk of laws of nature with talk of universal generalizations over individual
     entities.
   • Replace talk of causation with talk of constant conjunction of event-​types.

Indeed, a large part of the failure in each case stems from the extensional analysans not
capturing the intensionality of the analysandum!10
  I have so far discussed the handling of intensional notions. But even more recalcitrant to
our natural modes of thinking are hyperintensional notions—​ones for which truth value
may fail to be preserved even under replacement of necessarily co-​referential expressions.
Properties, at least when finely individuated, are often taken to be examples—​t hink of triangular and trilateral as distinct properties, yet necessarily co-​present or co-​absent. Still,
there is an extensional surrogate:

   • Replace talk of properties with talk of sets of possible individuals.

Hyperintensional notions count as intensional according to the definition that I gave; but it
is common to give special status to them, distinguishing them from what we might call the

        A reason why these extensional analyses clearly fail, where some considered earlier appear to
succeed, may be that these quantify over extensional entities, whereas the successful ones quantified
over entities that themselves might be regarded as intensional (possible worlds, a modal notion). It is
less clear that the analysis of (in)determinacy is successful; but then, perhaps it is less clear whether the
notion of a precisification being admissible is itself intensional. (If it is tacitly modal, then presumably
it is.) To the extent that an analysis traffics in entities that are themselves intensional, perhaps it is not
truly an extensional analysis after all. I bracket that concern here, trusting that applications of my
heuristic are easy to recognize in any case.

=== p. 369 ===

merely intensional. To avoid any terminological confusion, we might do better to restate
our heuristic: replace non-​extensional notions with extensional surrogates. This covers both
ways for a notion to fail to be extensional: (merely) intensional, and hyperintensional. Set-​
theoretic treatments of concepts are extensional, and they often provide helpful replacements of both kinds of concepts.
  And so it goes. We might come up with our own ways of unpacking a non-​extensional
concept in an extensional way. I like this one:

  • Replace talk of norms with universal quantification over all norm-​abiding agents. For
    example, replace ‘one has a moral obligation to treat others as ends rather than means’
    with ‘all morality-​abiding agents are agents who treat others as ends rather than
    means’.

Replace non-​extensional notions with extensional surrogates is a special case of a more
general heuristic: replace hard notions with easier surrogates. That’s rather vague, but the
idea is to replace concepts that confound us with close relatives that we understand better, that come more naturally to us—​for example, that are expressible using first-​order
logic and set theory. We must be careful that there is not too much distance between the
original concepts and their surrogates, for if there is, we run the risk that the surrogates
will misguide us. In an especially happy replacement, the replaceans has the same logic
as the replaceandum, sanctioning exactly the same inferences. This is clearly the case
when replacing probabilities with frequencies—​t he latter obey the probability axioms
(with finite additivity). It is arguably also the case with the extensional replacements of
necessity and possibility (with suitable choices of accessibility relations), and of counterfactuals. But even when it is clearly not the case, the replaceans can serve as a guide
to reasoning—​defeasible, to be sure. Mill’s methods for identifying causation are really
methods for identifying constant conjunction; and while causal inference has come a
long way since Mill, they still provide good rules of thumb. We should just remember
that good rules of thumb are not the last word.
   Replace non-​extensional notions with extensional surrogates is a powerful heuristic,
I think, because it is easier to picture things when they’re extensional. This brings me to my
final heuristic.

                             6. Draw a Picture

This heuristic again draws on a psychological fact about us, this time a familiar one.
Conceptual relationships that may be obscure when cloaked in words or symbols often leap
out at us when we represent them visually. Think of the power of Venn diagrams to represent set-​t heoretic relationships. And the surrogates above that can be cast set-​t heoretically
immediately lend themselves to Venn diagrams. The foregoing heuristic, then, works
particularly well in tandem with this one: translate from non-​extensional to extensional
notions, then diagram the latter.

=== p. 370 ===

   Example. If you draw a Venn diagram of the disease test example above, with areas representing classes of individuals roughly proportional to their respective population sizes,
the importance of the base rate becomes even more obvious.
   Example. Thanks to the Kripke semantics for various systems of modal logic, we can
easily diagram how different modal systems, corresponding to different assumptions on an
‘accessibility’ relation among worlds, validate different inferences.
   Example. Having given his own possible worlds analysis of counterfactuals, Lewis (1973a)
goes on to present various counterfactual fallacies, such as antecedent-​strengthening:

   p □→ q
     ∴ (p & r) □→ q.

(‘□→’ symbolizes the counterfactual conditional.) It may not be immediately obvious that
this is not a valid argument form. But he goes on to draw diagrams that allow one to see easily that it is not.
   However, the draw a picture heuristic can stand alone, unaided by the previous heuristic.
For example, it helps to diagram causal relationships even without entertaining the fiction
that causation is merely constant conjunction—​either with Lewis-​style (1973b) ‘neuron diagrams’, or Pearl-​style (2009) causal networks.
   Physicists know well the power of pictures—​for example, drawing a Minkowski space–​
time diagram rather than performing a deduction using the mathematics of special relativity. When a rod with clocks at each end moves relative to you, the clock at the front runs
behind the clock at the back. Showing this is relatively easy with a diagram, relatively hard
with the mathematics. Mathematicians are similarly well versed in the heuristic utility of
pictorial representations of abstract relationships. Indeed, Nelson (1993) is an entire book
of proofs without words or symbols. Again, we philosophers can import some of our heuristics from other disciplines.

     7. Some Metaphilosophical Ruminations

It is another psychological fact about us that we are limited in our ability to see what follows from what. (The Wason selection task famously brings this out.) We are prone to
drawing illicit inferences from our premises, and we are often blind to their consequences,
which are sometimes unwelcome. Here, logic is our great tool, our consistency and validity
policeman. But I must emphasize again that it is by no means our only such tool.
   I can characterize a good chunk of the philosophy that I find congenial with the slogan
‘making our implicit commitments explicit’. We collect, deploy and systematize intuitions,
analyze arguments, conduct thought experiments, refine definitions, adduce normative
constraints, and so on; and when we are doing our job properly, we check for the consistency and for any unwelcome consequences of our products (and celebrate the welcome
ones). The heuristics are to a large extent aids to these enterprises.
   Of course, you don’t need to be a philosopher to make our implicit commitments
explicit. Mathematicians do it too, and they remind us what a worthy enterprise it can be.
If my slogan sounds like it trivializes philosophy, we should remember that exemplifying it

=== p. 371 ===

may be no easy feat. Nobody thinks that it’s easy to make explicit how our commitment to
certain basic facts about positive integers, addition and exponentiation implicitly commit
us to Fermat’s Last Theorem.
   If we think of logic as an all-​purpose tool for checking what follows from what, and what
is compatible with what, at a high level of abstraction, then the heuristics collectively form
more of a Swiss army knife. Some of them have rather more specific targets or uses. ‘See definite descriptions in neon lights’ is a bit like a Swiss army knife’s scissors: useless for many
occasions, but exactly what you need for some. We want heuristics that have some generality, but that also have real bite. Too general, and they become useless: for example, ‘make an
insightful point!’ Too specific, and they become next to useless again: for example, ‘when
someone argues that space is purely relational, reply with Kant’s problem of incongruous
counterparts!’ The best heuristics lie somewhere in the middle of the spectrum: general
enough to be applicable in a wide range of cases, but not so general as to be empty. But of
course the heuristics can vary considerably in their generality among themselves, and still
earn their keep. The Swiss army knife’s scissors may have a greater range of uses than its
corkscrew, but on certain occasions the latter is exactly what you need.11

                                     8. Conclusion

I’ve given a small sampler of some philosophical heuristics. I have chosen them because
there are some nice interconnections among them, and I have tried to present some of them
in considerable detail to illustrate their fruitfulness from a number of angles. But I could
have chosen any number of others.
   As well as studying the content of our best scientific theories, we study the methodology
of the best scientists. (See, for instance, Harper’s recent (2012) book on Newton’s methodology.) Doing so not only tells us something about how science gets done; it can also inspire
us as to how to do it well. Similarly, studying the methodology of the best philosophers
not only tells us something about how philosophy gets done; it can also inspire us as to
how to do it well. I have learned from them many of the philosophical heuristics on my
ever-​growing list.
   To the extent that we fail to pay attention to such heuristics, we miss out on rich resources
for philosophical thinking. Yet I think that by and large, philosophers have been singularly
unreflective about them. I invite you to reflect on them with me.

References
Arntzenius, Frank, Adam Elga, and John Hawthorne (2004): ‘Bayesianism, Infinite
  Decisions, and Binding’, Mind, 113: 251–​83.
Arntzenius, Frank and Maudlin, Tim (2010): “Time Travel and Modern Physics”, in Edward
  N. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2010 Edition). URL = <http://​

          Now that you have reached the conclusion of this long paper, perhaps this is one of them.

=== p. 372 ===

   plato.stanford.edu/​archives/​spr2010/​entries/​time-​travel-​phys/​>. Accessed September
   21, 2015.
Bartha, Paul, John Barker, and Alan Hájek (2013): “Satan, Saint Peter, and Saint
   Petersburg: Decision Theory and Discontinuity at Infinity”, Synthese, 191(4): 629–​60.
Benacerraf, Paul (1967): “God, the Devil, and Gödel”, The Monist, 51: 9–​32.
Carnap, Rudolf (1952): The Continuum of Inductive Methods, Chicago: University of
   Chicago Press.
Chalmers, David J. (1996): The Conscious Mind, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Church, A., 1940: “On the Concept of a Random Sequence”, Bulletin of the American
   Mathematical Society, 46: 130–​5.
Elga, Adam (2004): “Defeating Dr. Evil with Self-​           Locating Belief”, Philosophy and
   Phenomenological Research, 69: 383–​96.
Gigerenzer, Gerd (1991): “How to Make Cognitive Illusions Disappear: Beyond ‘Heuristics
   and Biases’”, European Review of Social Psychology, 2: 83–​115.
Hájek, Alan (1996): “‘Mises Redux’—​Redux: Fifteen Arguments Against Finite Frequentism”,
   Erkenntnis, 45: 209–​27. Reprinted in Philosophy of Probability: Contemporary Readings, ed.
   Antony Eagle, Routledge 2010.
Hájek, Alan (2009): “Fifteen Arguments Against Hypothetical Frequentism”, Erkenntnis,
   70: 211–​35.
Hájek, Alan (2014): “Philosophical Heuristics and Philosophical Creativity”, in Elliot
   Samuel Paul and Scott Barry Kaufman (eds.) The Philosophy of Creativity. Oxford: Oxford
   University Press, 288–​317.
Harper, William L. (2012): Isaac Newton’s Scientific Method, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hume, David (1748/​1902), Enquiries Concerning the Human Understanding and Concerning
   the Principles of Morals, ed. L. A. Selby-​       Bigge, Oxford: Clarendon Press, Second
   Edition, 1902.
Jaynes, E. T. (2003): Probability Theory: The Logic of Science. Cambridge University Press.
Joyce, James M. (1998): “A Non-​Pragmatic Vindication of Probabilism”, Philosophy of Science,
   65: 575–​603.
Kelly, Kevin (1996): The Logic of Reliable Inquiry, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lewis, David (1969): Convention, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Lewis, David (1973a): Counterfactuals, Oxford: Blackwell.
Lewis, David (1973b): “Causation”, Journal of Philosophy, 70: 556–​67.
Lewis, David (1994): “Humean Supervenience Debugged”, Mind, 103: 473–​90.
Lucas, J. R. (1961): “Minds, Machines and Gödel,” Philosophy, 36: 112–​27.
Lycan, William (2009): “Giving Dualism Its Due”, Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 87
   (4): 551–​63.
Nelson, Roger B. (1993): Proofs Without Words, The Mathematical Association of America.
Nover, Harris and Alan Hájek (2004): “Vexing Expectations”, Mind, 113: 305–​17.
Nozick, Robert (1993): The Nature of Rationality, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Parfit, Derek (1984): Reasons and Persons, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pearl, Judea (2009): Causality, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2nd edition.
Penrose, R. (1989): The Emperor’s New Mind, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pollock, John (1983): “How Do You Maximize Expectation Value?”, Noûs, 17: 409–​21.
Pólya G. (1957): How to Solve It, 2nd ed., Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Priest, Graham (1994): “The Structure of the Paradoxes of Self-​Reference”, Mind, 103: 25–​34.
Putnam, Hilary (1980): “Models and Reality” The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 45 (3): 464–​82.

=== p. 373 ===

Sider, Ted (2002): “Hell and Vagueness”, Faith and Philosophy, 19: 58–​68.
Smith, Nicholas J. J. (2000): “The Principle of Uniform Solution (of the Paradoxes of Self-​
   Reference)”, Mind, 109: 117–​22
Stalnaker, Robert (1968): “A Theory of Conditionals”, in N. Rescher (ed.), Studies in Logical
   Theory, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 98–​112.
Stalnaker, Robert (1981): “A Defense of Conditional Excluded Middle”, in Harper, W. L.,
   Stalnaker, R., and Pearce, G. (eds.), Ifs, Reidel, Dordrecht, 87–​104.
Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman (1982): “Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics
   and Biases”, in Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic and Amos Tversky (eds.), Judgment Under
   Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 3–​22.
Unger, Peter 1979, ‘There Are No Ordinary Things’, Synthese, 41: 117–​54.
van Fraassen, Bas (1989): Laws and Symmetry, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
van Inwagen, Peter (1990): Material Beings, Ithaca: Cornell.
von Mises R., 1957, Probability, Statistics and Truth, revised English edition,
   New York: Macmillan.
Weber, Zach and Mark Colyvan (2010): “A Topological Sorites”, The Journal of Philosophy, 107
   (6) (June): 311–​25.
Williamson, Timothy (1994): Vagueness, London: Routledge.

