=== chunk: cappelen-gendler-hawthorne-2016-oxford-handbook/ch20-kelly-disagreement-in-philosophy ===
title: Kelly, "Disagreement in Philosophy: Its Epistemic Significance"
source_pdf: docs/sources/cappelen-gendler-hawthorne-2016-oxford-handbook/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 391-411
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 374
plan_page_end: 394
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 374 ===

                                      Chapter 20

                    Disagr eem en t i n
                      Phil osoph y
                            Its Epistemic Significance

                                    Thomas Kelly

                                  1. Introduction

Despite occasional declarations that philosophy is now in a position to move beyond the
contentiousness of its past, pervasive and intractable disagreement seems to be among its
characteristic features. In any case, such disagreement is a notable feature of philosophy’s
present as well as its history, and shows no signs of abating. The fact that philosophers disagree as often as they do, and in the ways that they do, is itself a phenomenon that gives rise
to philosophical questions. Some of these questions are epistemological. For example, how
(if at all) should one revise one’s philosophical views about controversial issues, given one’s
awareness that those views are not shared (and indeed, are explicitly rejected) by apparently competent philosophers? Should we refrain from holding confident philosophical
beliefs when informed philosophical opinion is divided about their truth? Does the lack of
consensus in philosophy mean that philosophical knowledge is off the table, at least in areas
where it is unrealistic to think that consensus is in the offing?
    This chapter explores the epistemological significance of disagreement in philosophy in
the light of some currently prominent theories of disagreement. I will be particularly concerned with whether the kind of controversy that we find in philosophy warrants a certain
kind of skepticism about the subject. Call someone a philosophical agnostic just in case he
or she refrains from holding confident opinions about philosophical questions: either he
or she suspends judgment about philosophical questions, or at best, holds relatively weak,
diffident opinions about their correct answers.1 A natural thought that has occurred to a

    1 Care is needed here to ensure that the stance of the philosophical agnostic ends up being coherent.

For example, it would not do to identify suspending judgment about whether p with investing credence
.5 in p: given that some philosophical theses are logically stronger than others, giving .5 credence to
every philosophical thesis would quickly result in incoherence. I will assume for the sake of argument
there is some way of representing the stance of the philosophical agnostic so that it is coherent.

=== p. 375 ===

number of philosophers is this: given the kind of disagreement that we find in philosophy, we really ought to be philosophical agnostics—​at least when it comes to the many
philosophical issues that are controversial among well-​informed, competent members of
the professional community.2 To the extent that one does hold confident opinions about
contested philosophical matters, those opinions are less than fully reasonable. (At least,
assuming that one is aware of their contested status.) Is this natural thought correct?
   Ideally, the best way to answer this question would be the following: take the correct
general account of how we should respond to disagreement and apply it to the philosophical case by plugging in various empirical facts about the disagreements that we
find in philosophy. Unfortunately, there is no generally agreed upon account of how we
should revise our beliefs in the light of disagreement: the epistemology of disagreement
is itself an area about which informed philosophical opinion is deeply divided.3 This
might seem to leave us in the following situation: whether one sees the lack of agreement
within philosophy as a compelling reason for philosophical agnosticism will depend
upon which general view about the epistemology of disagreement one accepts. If, for
example, one accepts a view on which it can be reasonable to steadfastly maintain one’s
opinions even when they are contested by those whose judgment one has no independent reason to discount, then one will not see the lack of agreement within philosophy
as warranting agnosticism. On the other hand, if one adopts a more conciliatory view
about the epistemology of disagreement, one will see the profound lack of agreement as a
compelling reason to adopt the stance of the agnostic. If this were right, then whether
philosophical agnosticism is ultimately compelling would depend (naturally enough)
on which of the various rival views about the epistemology of disagreement ultimately
turns out to be correct.
   Although natural, I think that the line of thought sketched in the last paragraph is mistaken. My contrary thesis is this: there is no plausible view about the epistemology of disagreement on which philosophical agnosticism is compelling.
   In order to explore this issue, I will survey some prominent alternative views about the
epistemology of disagreement and examine what happens when they are applied to the special case of philosophy. I will begin with views about disagreement on which the case for
philosophical agnosticism seems weakest, and then proceed to consider, in increasingly
greater detail, views on which the case seems strongest, at least prima facie. (As this suggests, the amount of space and attention devoted to a given view will not reflect my own
estimate of the chance that it is correct, but rather the plausibility with which it might be
thought to deliver the agnostic’s conclusion.) I will suggest that even when the latter views
are assumed to be true, there is no clear path from the kind of disagreement we find in philosophy to the skeptical attitude about the subject that is characteristic of the philosophical
agnostic.

   2 Previously published work that engages with this thought to at least some degree, and with

varying levels of sympathy, includes Armstrong (2006), Frances (2010, 2013), Fumerton (2010),
Goldberg (2009, 2013), Kornblith (2010), and van Inwagen (1996). I regret that the strict word limits of
the present volume prevent me from engaging with this literature in the kind of detail that it deserves,
although much that I say here bears on claims made by these authors.
   3 For a sampling of this, see the essays collected in Feldman and Warfield (2010) and Christensen

and Lackey (2013).

=== p. 376 ===

   Before beginning the survey, I should emphasize that my concern is not with philosophical agnosticism in general, or with the variety of grounds that might be offered in favor of
such a stance, but rather with the claim that we should be philosophical agnostics because
of something having to do with disagreement, or with the distribution of opinion that we
find among philosophers. Perhaps we should be philosophical agnostics for reasons unrelated to the phenomenon of disagreement. For example, one might think that even the best
philosophical arguments are simply not very strong compared to the kinds of arguments
we find in other domains4 and conclude on that basis that we should not hold confident
philosophical opinions. Nothing that is said in what follows will address such possibilities.
Indeed, because our exclusive concern here is with the potential skeptical import of philosophical disagreement, it will be helpful to proceed as follows: we assume, optimistically,
that we are or would be in a position to attain philosophical knowledge, or at least justified
philosophical beliefs, before facts about philosophical disagreement or the distribution of
opinion among philosophers are taken into account.5 As we will see, there are prominent
views about the epistemology of disagreement according to which the right kind of disagreement can undermine the rationality of continuing to hold a given belief, even if one
arrived at that belief in a rationally impeccable manner, and even if one’s belief would have
amounted to knowledge in the absence of the disagreement. Applied to the case of philosophy, the relevant thought would be the following: given the kinds of disagreements we
find among philosophers, one is not in a position to know or justifiably believe controversial philosophical theses, even if one would have been in a position to know and justifiably
believe those theses in the absence of controversy.

                                  2. Steadfast Views

Contributors to the epistemology of disagreement literature sometimes draw a rough
but serviceable distinction between steadfast and conciliatory views. For example, David
Christensen opens his (2011) paper with the following:

      Subtleties aside, a look at the topography of the disagreement debate reveals a major divide
      separating positions that are generally hospitable to maintaining one’s confidence in the
      face of disagreement, and positions that would mandate extensive revision to our opinions

      Consider, for example, the pessimistic assessment of van Inwagen (2006: 52):
      There are certainly successful arguments, both in everyday life and in the sciences. But are there any
      successful philosophical arguments? I know of none. (That is, I know of none for any substantive philosophical thesis.)
  (Van Inwagen does not draw the further skeptical conclusion, that the putative lack of successful
philosophical arguments warrants agnosticism.) For a critique of the pessimism, see McGrath and
Kelly, “Are There Any Successful Philosophical Arguments?”.
  5 Compare the way in which, in discussions of Humean skepticism about induction, we proceed on

the assumption that we have a great deal of ordinary perceptual knowledge about the world, i.e. that
more radical kinds of skepticism than the one under consideration are false.

=== p. 377 ===

   on many controversial matters. Let us call positions of the first sort “Steadfast” and positions of the second sort “Conciliatory”. (p. 1)

In this section, I will examine the case for philosophical agnosticism in the light of steadfast
views of disagreement; beginning with the next section, I will turn to conciliatory views.
   One kind of steadfast view involves commitment to a permissive conception of rationality, according to which there is frequently a significant amount of slack between a body
of evidence and what can be reasonably believed given that evidence. In particular, some
hold that rationality is sufficiently permissive to allow for the following kind of case: given
the available evidence, some individuals reasonably believe p while other individuals reasonably believe not-​p, with each group aware that there is informed disagreement about
whether p. The kind of view that I have in mind is endorsed by Gideon Rosen in the following passage:

   It should be obvious that reasonable people can disagree, even when confronted with a single body of evidence. When a jury or a court is divided in a difficult case, the mere fact of
   disagreement does not mean that someone is being unreasonable. Paleontologists disagree
   about what killed the dinosaurs. And while it is possible that most of the parties to this dispute are irrational, this need not be the case. To the contrary, it would appear to be a fact
   of epistemic life that a careful review of the evidence does not guarantee consensus, even
   among thoughtful and otherwise rational investigators.
                                                                                     (2001: 71–​2)

Here, Rosen suggests that paleontologists who accept rival theories about the demise of the
dinosaurs on the basis of shared evidence might be fully reasonable in steadfastly maintaining their views, despite being aware that their views are not shared (and indeed, are
explicitly rejected) by a significant number of their professional colleagues. But, one might
think, what holds for paleontologists holds for philosophers as well. Thus, an epistemic per-missivist might reject the claim that disagreement requires philosophical agnosticism on
the grounds that many, most, or even all of the questions that are controversial among philosophers constitute permissive cases.6
   Some steadfast views do not presuppose the truth of a permissive conception of rationality. For example, according to what is sometimes called The Right Reasons View (Kelly
2005, Titelbaum 2015, Weatherson 2013), one is justified in steadfastly maintaining one’s
belief that p in the face of disagreement, provided one’s belief is a correct response to the
available evidence and arguments that bear on whether p. For purposes of illustration,
suppose that, given the current state of play in the philosophical literature, the case for
incompatibilism really is stronger than the case for compatibilism, and that at least some
incompatibilists hold their view because they have recognized that this is so. According
to the Right Reasons View, incompatibilists in this position are fully justified in maintaining their belief, notwithstanding the fact that they are fully aware that there are significant numbers of philosophically sophisticated compatibilists who vigorously disagree
with them, and who are unpersuaded by the very considerations that they find compelling.
More generally, a proponent of the Right Reasons View holds that, once one has taken into
account all of the considerations that proponents of a rival view have offered in favor of

           For a recent exchange on epistemic permissivism, see White (2013) and Kelly (2013b).

=== p. 378 ===

their view and against one’s own, one need not give any additional weight to the fact they
disagree. So long as one correctly responds to the first-​order evidence and arguments, one
is fully justified in maintaining one’s belief, and the rationality of believing as one does is
not susceptible to being undermined or defeated by higher-​order considerations having to
do with how others have responded to the evidence and arguments.
    Clearly, if we assume that the Right Reasons View is true, then the mere fact that there is
a great deal of disagreement within philosophy does not show that we should be philosophical agnostics, or that it would be unreasonable to hold strong opinions about contested
philosophical issues. For in any case in which someone holds a philosophical view on the
basis of what are in fact good reasons, they are fully justified in sticking to their guns, even
if that view is vigorously contested by others.
    A related but somewhat less radical proposal is the Total Evidence View (Kelly 2010,
Setiya 2012: 20–3, Scanlon 2014: 80), which shares features with both the Right Reasons
View and the more conciliatory views that we will consider in section 3. On the Total
Evidence View, when one learns that a person whose judgment one has good reason to
respect has arrived at an opinion that conflicts with one’s own, one acquires an additional
piece of evidence against one’s view (even if one was already aware of all of the considerations on which the other person bases her opinion). Typically, then, it will be rational to
temper one’s confidence to at least some extent. However, it does not follow that one should
give up one’s original opinion. Whether it is reasonable to retain that opinion (albeit with
somewhat diminished confidence) depends on what is now one’s total evidence, a body of
evidence which includes both the fact that the other person judged as they did as well as the
original evidence on which one based one’s own opinion. And crucially, the proponent of
the Total Evidence View insists, there is no guarantee that this enlarged body of evidence
will mandate an attitude of agnosticism or suspension of judgment towards the original
target proposition.
    To make things more concrete, suppose as before that as things stand the case for incom-patiblism is stronger than the case for compatibilism. Recognizing this, you take up the
position as your own. You then learn that I (someone whose philosophical judgment you
generally hold in high regard) have arrived at the opposite view on the basis of my own
assessment of the arguments. (To temporarily avoid complications which we will take up
in later sections, let’s assume, unrealistically, that at this point you know of no one else’s
opinion about the issue.) Suppose next that upon learning that I am a convinced compati-bilist, you reduce the credence that you give to incompatibilism to some degree. However,
even after you take my opinion into account, you still regard it as significantly more likely
that incompatibilism is true, to the point that you can correctly be described as retaining
your belief in incompatibilism. It’s not that you take yourself to have some independent
reason for discounting my opinion relative to yours, as would be the case if, for example,
I had confided in you that I had reviewed the arguments in a cursory fashion, or was suffering from a debilitating headache at the time. Rather, the only reasons that you have for
thinking that I am more likely to be wrong than you about this particular issue are the very
reasons on which you base your belief that incompatibilism is true in the first place.
    Is it reasonable for you to retain your belief in these circumstances? Yes, says the Right
Reasons theorist: given that the available arguments were sufficient to justify your belief in
incompatibilism before you learned what I think, the mere fact that I turn out to disagree

=== p. 379 ===

with you is insufficient to undermine the rationality of your belief. No, say many proponents of conciliatory views: given that you have no independent reason to think that you
were the one who did a better job in responding to the arguments, you should treat our
original opinions even-​handedly and thus suspend judgment. In contrast, a proponent of
the Total Evidence View will insist that we have not yet been provided with enough information about the fiction in order to know whether it’s reasonable for you to retain your
belief. What it is reasonable for you to believe about the issue depends on what is now your
total evidence, and that body of evidence includes both the philosophical arguments themselves, as well as the fact that I judge that compatibilism is correct. On the Total Evidence
View, the fact that I believe as I do is a piece of evidence against your view; your total evidence is thus less supportive of belief in incompatibilism than it was before you learned
of my opinion, or than it would be if I had independently arrived at the same conclusion
as you. Whether it is nevertheless still adequate to justify your continuing to believe that
incompatibilism is true will depend on such features of the case as the substantiality and
strength of the original arguments for incompatibilism, as well as the weight of your reasons for thinking that I’m likely to be a good judge about the question—​features that have
not been stipulated.
   How does the disagreement-​based case for philosophical agnosticism fare if we assume
the truth of the Total Evidence View? The answer to this question is not immediately obvious.7 On the one hand, the Total Evidence View shares with the Right Reasons View a commitment to the idea that, when one arrives at a position in virtue of a correct assessment
of the available arguments, one’s belief has a certain resistance to being rationally undermined by the fact that others arrived at different conclusions, even when those others are
generally competent philosophers possessed of good judgment. On the other hand, the
Total Evidence View shares with conciliatory views a commitment to the idea that when
such a person does arrive at a different conclusion, this counts as a piece of evidence that
one has made a mistake, and moreover, that the more competent philosophers there are
who disagree with one, the stronger the evidence is that one has made a mistake.8 Indeed,
on what I regard as the best version of the Total Evidence View, there will be cases in which
even if the first-​order evidence and arguments strongly support a given belief, it would be
unreasonable to continue to hold that belief when one learns that sufficient numbers of
those who are in the best position to judge think otherwise. (That is, even relatively strong
first-​order evidence can be swamped when enough higher-​order evidence pointing in the
opposite direction is amassed.) And one might contend that such cases are something like
the norm in philosophy, where there is typically no shortage of formidable dissenters from
one’s preferred views.

     The Total Evidence View is sometimes criticized on the grounds that it fails to offer determinate
advice in certain (incompletely specified) cases for which rival views do offer determinate advice.
However, the most charitable way to understand this is as an expression of skepticism, on the part of
proponents of the view, about whether there are any true disagreement norms at the level of generality
that some have sought. For skepticism about the existence of such norms, see Feldman (2009), Kelly
(2013a), and especially, Lasonen-​Aarnio (2013).
  8 At least, provided there is some measure of independence in the way that these philosophers

arrived at their views.

=== p. 380 ===

   At this point, one thing seems clear: to the extent that a plausible case for philosophical agnosticism might be made on the assumption that The Total Evidence View is true,
this is because of features that it shares with more conciliatory views. In general, the Total
Evidence View is more hospitable to sticking to one’s guns in the face of controversy than
conciliatory views are. Because of this, if there is a sound disagreement-​based case for
philosophical agnosticism on the assumption that the Total Evidence View is true, then
there will also be a sound disagreement-​based case for philosophical agnosticism on the
assumption that some conciliatory view is true. On the other hand, if, as I will suggest,
there is no sound disagreement-​based case for philosophical agnosticism on the assumption that some conciliatory view is true, then there will be no such case on the assumption that the Total Evidence View is true, either. Let us turn then, to an examination of
conciliatory views.

                            3. Conciliatory views

Proponents of conciliatory views9 tend to see the phenomenon of disagreement as mandating relatively extensive revisions to our opinions about many controversial matters. The
case for such revision is often taken to be especially compelling when those who disagree
are known to share certain intellectual virtues and to have reviewed the same evidence and
arguments in arriving at their opinions. Here, for example, is Richard Feldman:

      [C]‌onsider those cases in which the reasonable thing to think is that another person, every
      bit as sensible, serious, and careful as oneself, has reviewed the same information as oneself
      and has come to a contrary conclusion to one’s own . . . An honest description of the situation acknowledges its symmetry. . . . In those cases, I think, the skeptical conclusion is the
      reasonable one: it is not the case that both points of view are reasonable, and it is not the
      case that one’s own point of view is somehow privileged. Rather, suspension of judgment is
      called for.
                                                                                         (2006: 235)

   One motivation for conciliatory views is that they deliver what strike many as the
intuitively compelling verdicts about certain concrete examples. Consider, for example,
Christensen’s “Mental Math Case” (2007). In the Mental Math Case, you and I independently calculate our shares of the dinner tab. (We’ve agreed to divide the check evenly
among everyone who was at dinner.) We know, on the basis of substantial track record evidence, that we are more or less equally competent when it comes to performing this general
kind of calculation (in our long history of dining together, we almost always come up with
the same answer, but on those occasions when we’ve come up with different answers, each
of us has turned out to be correct approximately half the time). On this occasion, you arrive
at the number $43 while I arrive at the number $45. A widely shared intuition is that, upon
discovering this, both of us (including the person who in fact reasoned correctly, assuming
that one of us did) should become much less confident of his or her original answer, and

   For representative statements, see Christensen (2007, 2011), Elga (2007), Feldman (2006),
Kornblith (2010), and Matheson (2009).

=== p. 381 ===

that indeed, each of us should divide our credences more or less evenly between the two
rival answers.
    Consider also the way in which one might try to motivate conciliatory views by appealing to analogies involving inanimate measuring devices.10 For example, suppose that I form
my beliefs about the ambient temperature in some room by consulting my thermometer.
(To avoid complications, we can suppose that I have no other access to the temperature of
the room. Perhaps I’m in an adjacent room, looking at my thermometer through a window,
and I know that the temperature of the room that I’m in is not reliably correlated with the
temperature of the room in which the thermometer is located.) I have no reason to think
that anything is amiss with my thermometer, so the beliefs that I form in this way are perfectly reasonable. However, I then discover that the reading returned by my thermometer is
inconsistent with the reading returned by your thermometer, which is also clearly visible in
the adjacent room. Unless I have some special reason to trust my thermometer over yours,
it seems as though I should be agnostic about whose thermometer is correct. Certainly, it
wouldn’t be defensible to favor the reading of my thermometer simply because that’s what
my thermometer says, or because that’s what I justifiably believed before I learned about
your thermometer. Moreover, the same seems to be true even if your thermometer really is
the one that’s malfunctioning on this occasion, and mine is functioning perfectly. So long
as I have no independent evidence that that is what is taking place, the mere fact that my
thermometer is the one that’s functioning properly on this occasion doesn’t justify favoring
what it reports over what yours reports. But, one might think, what holds for thermometers holds for believers as well: when I find myself in a disagreement with someone else,
then, in the absence of some independent reason for thinking that I’m the one who is correct, I should suspend judgment, even if my original opinion was fully reasonable before
I became aware of the disagreement.
    For our purposes, a notable feature of these examples is the way in which they suggest
that even beliefs with seemingly impeccable rational credentials can be undermined when
a certain kind of conflict emerges. Suppose that in the Mental Math Case, you were the one
who arrived at the correct answer via an impeccable calculation. In that case, it is extremely
natural to credit you with knowing the correct answer (and with being in a position to
rationally invest a high degree of confidence in it) prior to learning that I arrived at a different answer. Similarly, if I arrived at my original belief about the temperature by relying
on a thermometer that was in fact functioning perfectly, then it is natural to credit me with
knowing the temperature prior to the discovery that your thermometer says something
else. Indeed, given the relatively precarious nature of philosophical reasoning, it is natural
to think that the epistemic standing of beliefs arrived at via flawless arithmetical reasoning
or via reliance on accurate thermometers generally compares favorably with the epistemic
standing of beliefs to the effect that a given philosophical position is correct, even in cases
in which the latter beliefs are arrived at via a correct assessment of the philosophical state
of play. But if knowledge that has been arrived at via flawless arithmetical reasoning or
via reliance on accurate thermometers can nevertheless be undermined by the emergence
of disagreement, surely the epistemic credentials of one’s philosophical opinions can be

                            For a discussion of the strategy, see Kelly (2014).

=== p. 382 ===

undermined by one’s awareness that apparently competent philosophers have arrived at
incompatible views.
   It might seem then, that adopting a conciliatory view about disagreement will generate strong and perhaps irresistible pressures towards philosophical agnosticism. However,
I think that the path from conciliatory views to philosophical agnosticism is much more
precarious than is often assumed. Indeed, closer inspection casts doubt on whether there is
any plausible conciliatory view on which philosophical agnosticism is compelling.
   As a first step towards seeing this, let’s note that at least some prominent conciliatory
views defended in the literature seem to allow for the holding of strong opinions about contested philosophical matters. Consider, for example, Adam Elga’s “Equal Weight View”
(2007). For Elga, a particularly threatening kind of disagreement occurs when one finds
that one disagrees with someone whom one regards as an epistemic peer. In Elga’s lingo,
you count someone as an epistemic peer with respect to a given issue just in case: “… you
think, conditional on a disagreement arising, the two of you are equally likely to be mistaken” (487). Christensen’s Mental Math Case exemplifies a case of peer disagreement in
this sense, or at least, is naturally read as such: given that you and I acknowledge that we are
equally good at arithmetic, it is natural to think that, if we were asked prior to performing
the calculation who was more likely to be wrong in the event of a disagreement, we would
admit that we were equally likely to be wrong; in this respect, we regard each other as peers
with respect to the question of our share of the bill. Elga argues that, in such cases, suspension of judgment is called for, and it is in virtue of this feature that his view is standardly
classified as a conciliatory view.
   However, Elga emphasizes that his view does not entail that we should suspend judgment
about all or even most controversial questions.11 This is because

       in messy real-​world cases . . . one’s reasoning about the disputed issue is tangled up with
       one’s reasoning about many other matters. As a result, in the real-​world cases one tends
       not to count one’s dissenting associates—​however smart and well informed—​as epistemic
       peers. (492)

That is, when one finds oneself in a disagreement about whether (e.g.) some proposed tax
cut would stimulate the economy, that disagreement is typically not an isolated one. It is
not as though one disagrees about that issue and nothing else; rather, one typically finds
that one disagrees with the other person about any number of other, related issues as well
(e.g. certain claims about human motivation and the ways in which people respond to
financial incentives, or the effects of similar tax cuts that have been enacted in the past).
And precisely because one takes one’s interlocutor to be wrong about these surrounding,
related issues, one will not regard him or her as equally likely to be right about the issue

      Indeed, in Elga’s estimation, one of the most pressing challenges that any conciliatory view must
overcome is what he calls the problem of spineleness: “the problem that an egalitarian view on how
to respond to disagreement will recommend suspension of judgment on virtually all controversial
issues” (492). Elga suggests that if a view about disagreement did recommend that one suspend
judgment on virtually all controversial issues, then that would amount to a reductio ad absurdum of
that view. So he is particularly adamant that the Equal Weight View has no such consequence. For
criticism of Elga on this front, see McGrath (2007) and Kornblith (2010).

=== p. 383 ===

under dispute. That is, one will not count one’s interlocutor as a peer with respect to the
question of whether the proposed tax cut will stimulate the economy. Thus

   with respect to many controversial issues, the associates who one counts as peers tend to have
   views that are similar to one’s own. That is why—​contrary to initial impressions—​t he equal
   weight view does not require one to suspend judgment on everything controversial. (494)

But of course, philosophy is surely a paradigm of a domain in which the disputed issues are
“messy” in Elga’s sense: it is not as though typical philosophical disputes are isolated ones
that take place against a background of generally agreed-​upon common ground. (Consider
just how messy things can get—​and how quickly the messiness ensues—​when disputes
break out between Kantians and consequentialists, or between physicalists and dualists,
or between epistemicists and supervaluationists.) In this respect, disagreements between
philosophers are much more like disagreements about the probable effects of enacting
some tax cut than the kind of disagreement that we find in the Mental Math Case. As far as
Elga’s conciliatory view is concerned then, such philosophical controversies are unlikely to
require the dissenting parties to suspend judgment.
   Consider next a move made by David Christensen in his (2011) defense of conciliation-ism. There, Christensen distinguishes between two different views that a conciliationist
might endorse (15–​16). On the first view, the mere absence of good reason to think that one is
better informed or more likely to have reasoned correctly than the other person is enough
to warrant belief revision in the event of a disagreement. On the second view, the mere
absence of good reason to think oneself superior is insufficient to warrant belief revision;
rather, belief revision is warranted when one has positive reasons to believe that the other
person is (at least) equally well informed and equally likely to have reasoned correctly.
Christensen argues that the conciliationist has compelling reasons to adopt the second
type of view over the first. He also emphasizes that the second view is more limited in its
scope, and hence, at least somewhat more limited in its potential to generate skeptical consequences. On the preferred picture

   when disagreement undermines one’s rational confidence in some claim, the undermining
   must be based on one’s beliefs about the other person. When those beliefs including extensive dispute-​independent evidence of intellectual and evidential parity (as in the Mental
   Math Case), the undermining power of disagreement is high. But in some cases, one has little dispute-​independent reason to be highly confident, one way or the other, about whether
   the other person is even one’s approximate peer. In those cases, the undermining power of
   disagreement should intuitively be less. (16)

   Now, although Christensen himself does not suggest anything like this, one might think
that there is a crucial difference here between the Mental Math Case and typical disagreements between philosophers. In particular, the Mental Math Case is set up so that you and
I have strong evidence that we are peers: specifically, there is the long history that supplies
us with track-​record evidence, track-​record evidence to the effect that when disagreements
of this kind have arisen in the past, each of us has turned out to be correct a more or less
equal number of times. In contrast, there is typically nothing like this in cases of philosophical disagreement: if you and I find ourselves in a disagreement about some philosophical issue, we simply will not have the same kind of objective, non-​question-​begging

=== p. 384 ===

track-​record evidence that would put us in a strong position to make a judgment about our
comparative reliability.12 (And this will be true even if we are very familiar with the other
person’s philosophical views, across a wide range of issues.) At best, it seems that what we
really have to go on, at least in the first instance, are certain putative marks or indications
of reliability—​perhaps, for example, the ingenuity and resourcefulness that the other person manifests in parrying objections and devising new arguments for their view. But one
might reasonably wonder just how strong the correlation is between the possession of such
intellectual skills and reliable philosophical judgment, especially in view of the fact that the
history of philosophy shows that such skills have been amply manifested by thinkers who
agree with one another about very little (and so their possession is evidently compatible
with a great deal of error). More generally, strong evidence that another person is your peer
with respect to some philosophical question, or some cluster of philosophical questions,
might be relatively hard to come by (see King 2012). And in the absence of such evidence,
sticking to your guns might seem more defensible, as Christensen suggests about the general case. Of course, if hard evidence of comparative reliability is difficult to come by in the
philosophical case, then it might be that you often end up lacking evidence that you are
more likely to be correct than I am about some philosophical question. But as we have seen,
on Christensen’s version of conciliationism, merely lacking evidence that you are my superior is not yet enough to give you a reason to revise your opinion when we disagree; rather,
what is relevant is whether you have good evidence that I am your approximate equal (or
superior).
   Thus, in somewhat different yet related ways, the work of Elga and Christensen suggests
how one can endorse a view about disagreement that is recognizably conciliationary while
denying that philosophical agnosticism follows as a normative upshot. Specifically, one
might endorse the conciliationist idea that one is required to suspend judgment whenever
one disagrees with someone whom one takes to be a peer (Elga), or with someone whom
one has good reason to think is a peer (Christensen), while simultaneously emphasizing that
such cases might turn out to be much less common than initial appearances suggest.

  4. Egalitarian Versions of Conciliationism

Conciliatory views of peer disagreement call for a kind of epistemic democracy among
peers, in some honorific sense of “peer” given by the theory. In determining what it is reasonable for one to believe about some question, one’s own judgment is not privileged over
the judgment of any other recognized peer. Given this, it is clear enough how a theorist
who accepts a conciliatory view of peer disagreement might nevertheless end up denying
that widespread philosophical disagreement warrants philosophical agnosticism: namely,
by employing a notion of peerhood that makes it relatively difficult for philosophers who
disagree with one another to count as peers, or to recognize each other as such. (Compare
political systems that employ egalitarian, democratic decision-​making procedures among

      On the significance of the (un)availability of non-​question begging track record evidence in
different domains, see especially McGrath (2009, 2011).

=== p. 385 ===

the class of citizens, but which are relatively stingy or sparing when it comes to granting
citizenship status in the first place.)
   Of course, this kind of maneuver immediately suggests possible conciliatory views that
do seem to have skeptical upshot: namely, versions of the view that are relatively inclusive or
liberal when it comes to counting disputing philosophers as “peers”. Now, it is clearly possible to go too far in a liberalizing direction, even if one limits oneself to the class of active
professional philosophers. For example, I have various half-​baked opinions about how
sentences containing problematic anaphora should be analyzed, but I would hardly expect
philosophers of language working in the area to be moved by my opinions, and indeed,
I would regard it as a kind of epistemological mistake on their part if they were. Such philosophers of language should not regard me as a peer, in any sense of “peer” that could possibly matter to the epistemology of disagreement.
   In response, one might adopt some less inclusive construal of the notion, but one that
is still inclusive enough to allow even philosophers who agree about relatively little of
substance to count as “peers”. For example, one might try something along the following
lines: with respect to a given philosophical issue, count well-​informed, apparently competent professional philosophers specializing in the area as peers, regardless of whether they
agree or disagree with one another about the issue in question, and regardless of how much
they agree or disagree about surrounding issues. Surely, one might think, if we adopted
this or some similarly liberal construal of peerhood, and then combined it with a conciliatory view about the correct response to peer disagreement, this would require agnosticism
when it comes to philosophically controversial issues.
   But I think that even this thought cannot ultimately be sustained.
   As a first step towards seeing why this is so, let’s note the following point: in general,
the fact that a given position can correctly be described as controversial among a population greatly underdetermines how widely accepted it is within that population. One way
in which a view can be controversial within a population is for that population to be evenly
divided about its truth, with an equal number of people on each side of the issue. But that
is an unusual special case, and one that is seldom realized when dealing with populations
of any significant size. In fact, a position can be controversial even if it is accepted by a significant majority of the relevant population. For example, over the past forty years, support
for capital punishment among the American public has never dropped below 60%, and has
often been significantly higher than that.13 Nevertheless, during that same period, the legitimacy of capital punishment has often been cited—​correctly, I believe—​as a paradigmatic
example of an issue that is controversial among the American public.14

      See <http://​w ww.gallup.com/​poll/​1606/​death-​penalty.aspx> (accessed September 21, 2015).
      How popular can an opinion be and still be a controversial opinion? It is at least clear that when
an opinion is held by everyone in a given population, it is uncontroversial within that population. But
perfect unanimity is not required: the view that Adolf Hitler was a bad person is not controversial
among the American public, even though there are some Americans who deny it. The general question
of how substantial dissent must be in order for a majority opinion to count as controversial is likely
both vague and context-​sensitive. For our purposes, we need not pursue this question further; the
important point is that a position can be controversial even if its supporters significantly outnumber
its opponents, both in absolute terms and as a percentage of the relevant population.

=== p. 386 ===

   Philosophy abounds with similar examples. Consider the following issues, each of which
is central to a major subfield of the discipline:

   (1) Epistemology: whether some of our knowledge is a priori
   (2) Metaphysics: whether the best account of laws of nature is Humean or non-​Humean
   (3) Philosophy of science: whether scientific realism is true
   (4) Philosophy of Mind: externalism versus internalism about mental content
   (5) Philosophy of mathematics: Platonism versus nominalism about abstract objects
   (6) Ethics: Cognitivism versus non-​cognitivism about moral judgment
   (7) Decision theory: whether one should take one box or two boxes in Newcomb’s
       problem

   Each of these issues is controversial within contemporary philosophy. Nevertheless, the
best information that we have about the current state of informed philosophical opinion
suggests that, in each case, such opinion comes down heavily on one side of the issue.15
Thus, among epistemologists, 77% favor the view that there is a priori knowledge. Among
metaphysicians, 72% favor non-​Humean over Humean accounts of the laws of nature while
fewer than 20% favor Humean accounts.16 Among philosophers of science, 70% favor scientific realism while fewer than 10% favor anti-​realism. Among philosophers of mind, 56%
favor externalism about mental content while fewer than 20% are internalists. Similarly,
60% of philosophers of math favor Platonism about abstract objects while only 20% favor
nominalism. Almost 75% of metaethicists favor cognitivism about moral judgment with
approximately 12% favoring non-​cognitivism. Among decision theorists, those who favor
Two-​Boxing outnumber those who favor One-​Boxing by a forty-​point margin (61.3%–​
21.3%). Many other examples could be provided, including the popularity of compatiblism
about free will among metaphysicians, of the analytic–​synthetic distinction among philosophers of language, of moral realism among metaethicists, of physicalism about the
mind among philosophers of mind, of classical logic among logicians and philosophers
of logic, of switching in the Trolley Problem among normative ethicists, and of common-​
sense realism about the external world among both all philosophers and epistemologists.
While there are some controversial issues where informed philosophical opinion seems to
be more or less evenly divided, such cases are much more the exception than the norm.
   This empirical fact is worth bearing in mind whenever one looks to apply putative lessons from the epistemology of disagreement literature to the case of philosophy, for that
literature typically focuses on cases of disagreement where opinion is evenly divided.
Indeed, for heuristic reasons, the epistemology of disagreement literature often focuses on
relatively idealized, two-​person cases of disagreement. In these cases, one person arrives at

      See the results of the 2009 PhilPapers survey conducted by David Chalmers and David Bourquet
at <http://​philpapers.org/​surveys/​results.pl> (accessed September 21, 2015), which is the source for
all of the numbers reported in this paragraph. The numbers reported here reflect the opinions of the
survey’s ‘target faculty’ (professors of philosophy at 99 leading departments) possessing the listed area
of specialization.
   16 Here and throughout, the percentages fail to sum to 100 because the remainder of the

respondents selected a third option, “Other”, which covers such sub-​options as “agnostic/​undecided”,
“insufficiently familiar with the issue”, and “the question is too unclear to be answered”.

=== p. 387 ===

the view that p, while a peer arrives at the view that not-​p, or at some view that is incompatible with p. Of course, any example that instantiates this basic structure is not only a case
in which p is controversial in the relevant population, but is also a case in which opinion
about whether p is perfectly divided within that population. Because the latter is a very special case of the former, we as theorists should be wary of generalizing plausible conclusions
about such examples to cases of disagreement where opinion is not evenly divided.
   Consider once again Christensen’s Mental Math Case. Suppose that one shares the
orthodox intuition about the example: that at the moment we learn that I arrived at the
number 45 and you arrived at the number 43, we should suspend judgment about which
answer is correct. Given this verdict about that particular case, consider two different lessons one might be tempted to draw by generalizing in different ways:

       a) Once I learn that I have a peer who holds a view that is incompatible with p, then it is
          no longer possible for me to reasonably believe p: I should suspend judgment about
          whether p.
       b) Once I learn that the distribution of opinion among the peers is evenly divided as to
          whether p, then it is no longer possible for me to reasonably believe p: I should suspend judgment about whether p.

Whatever arguments might be offered on behalf of b), it is clear enough that a) is false.
According to a), learning that I have at least one peer who thinks that not-​p is sufficient to
undermine the rationality of my continuing to believe p. It thus entails that, in a case in which
I simultaneously learn the opinion of multiple peers, the fact that one of the peers thinks not-​
p suffices to undermine the rationality of my believing p, even if all of the other peers independently arrived at the conclusion that p. But that is clearly incorrect, and is not something
that any clear-​headed conciliationist will accept. In the Mental Math Case, even if the rationality of your belief that each of us owes $43 is undermined when you learn that I arrived at $45
and nothing else, it is clearly not undermined by your learning that I arrived at $45 and the
other four people at the table also arrived at $43. Indeed, in the latter circumstances the effect
of learning the distribution of opinion within the group should have the effect of making you
even more confident of your answer than you were originally, notwithstanding the fact that
you now know that someone who is your peer arrived at an incompatible answer, something
that you did not know before. The general moral, which no clear-​headed conciliationist will
deny, is that the numbers count: even if you know that your view is contradicted by some who
are in as good or better position to pass judgment, this does not show that you should suspend
judgment, for those who disagree might be outnumbered within the relevant group.
   In fact, when one is dealing with groups whose members are at least slightly better than
chance at answering a given kind of question, it is striking how quickly the probability that
the majority opinion is correct increases with either the margin or the size of the group.
Although the point is familiar from discussions of the Condorcet Jury Theorem, it’s worth
briefly illustrating with some numbers. Imagine a group of fifty people, each of whom is
only slightly better than chance—​say, 55% accurate—​at answering a certain kind of ‘yes’
or ‘no’ question correctly.17 In order to keep things parallel with the Mental Math Case and

      Of course, many canonical philosophical questions can be naturally cast in this form, e.g. “Is free
will compatible with determinism?” or “Is any of our knowledge a priori?”

=== p. 388 ===

the other examples standardly used to motivate conciliatory views, we assume that each
person arrives at his or her opinion independently. Of course, when the group splits perfectly down the middle, with twenty-​five members of the opinion that p and twenty-​five of
the opinion that not-​p, then the chance that either group is correct given just those facts is
50%. However, when the group splits 55/​45, the chance that those in the majority are correct is approximately 73%. Suppose that we increase the size of the community from 50 to
70 while holding their reliability constant at 55%. In that case, when the group splits 55–​45,
the chance that the majority is correct is over 80%; if instead the group breaks 60–​40, the
chance that the majority is correct rises to over 94%.
   The effect is even more dramatic when, instead of increasing the size of the original
group, we increase their reliability even slightly. Suppose, for example, that rather than
assuming that the members of the group are a slightly better than chance 55% reliable,
we more optimistically assume that they are 60% reliable. On that assumption, when the
group splits 55–​45, the chance that the majority is correct is over 88%. When the group splits
60–​40, the chance that the majority is correct rises to over 98%, with the chance that the
minority view is correct less than 2%. In these circumstances, if we proportioned our subjective confidence to these chances, we would be virtually certain that the majority opinion
is correct.
   As noted above, there are many controversial philosophical issues with respect to which
informed philosophical opinion divides quite unevenly, exceeding the 55–​45 or 60–​40 splits
stipulated to hold in our toy models. Of course, even if we assume that an egalitarian theory
of how to take the opinions of others into account is true, the high levels of confidence that
would be licensed by lopsided majorities in the toy models would not be reliable guides to
the levels of confidence licensed by similarly lopsided majorities within the philosophical
community, for the toy models involve assumptions that clearly do not hold of the actual
philosophical community. Notably, for example, each of the individuals in the toy model is
stipulated to arrive at his or her views independently (as in the Mental Math Case), and it
is manifestly not true that professional philosophers arrive at their philosophical views
independently of one another. The toy models are thus meant to be suggestive rather than
probative. Accordingly, the point that I wish to make is a relatively modest one: given the
kinds of lopsided majorities that often obtain in philosophy, there is no reason to think
that an adequate egalitarian theory (one which was sensitive to the various kinds of influence and dependencies in the way in which philosophers arrive at their views) would
end up recommending agnosticism as the correct general response to philosophical
controversy, as opposed to a relatively confident belief that a certain position is true in
many cases.
   Of course, we can imagine possible histories of how the actual distribution of philosophical opinion came about that would warrant agnosticism, given a conciliatory view of peer
disagreement. For example, suppose that the following were true: not only do professional
philosophers not arrive at their opinions in complete independence from one another, but
in fact, any philosopher automatically inherits any view that is adamantly held by his or
her dissertation adviser. The reason why over 75% of epistemologists think that there is
at least some a priori knowledge is that they studied with the leading guru at The School
of Rationalism, while the fewer than 15% who deny this studied with the leading guru at
The School of Empiricism. Here the numbers should drop out entirely: assuming that the
rationalist guru and the empiricist guru are counted as peers, the case effectively reduces

=== p. 389 ===

to the kind of two-​person case of peer disagreement that is often the focus of attention in
the literature, in response to which conciliatory views typically counsel agnosticism. But of
course, we know that nothing like this fictitious history is actual.
   We should also note that there are at least some possible conciliatory views that would
warrant philosophical agnosticism as things actually stand. For example, consider a view
according to which you cannot reasonably believe p so long as some formidable philosopher earnestly denies p. Given that with respect to almost any philosophically controversial issue, one can typically find at least one formidable philosopher on either side of the
question, this conciliatory view would consistently recommend agnosticism in cases of
philosophical controversy. But this conciliatory view is not a plausible one, as it in effect
attributes too much undermining power to the views of formidable outliers.18 (Even if some
mathematically competent person in our group comes up with a different answer than the
rest of us, it does not follow, on any remotely plausible view of disagreement, that suspension of judgment is required.)
   Another worry about the line of argument sketched in this section runs as follows. In the
toy models we have considered, it was assumed not only that the peers arrive at their views
independently, but also that that they are at least slightly better than chance in answering
the relevant questions correctly.19 Is even this seemingly modest assumption too optimistic
in the case of philosophy? Perhaps philosophers are so unreliable that they would be better
off flipping coins than attending to arguments in trying to answer questions like “Is some
of our knowledge a priori?” or “Is free will compatible with determinism?” In general, if it
is assumed that the members of a group are sufficiently unreliable, then it is not the case
that a lopsided majority is more likely to be correct than the badly outnumbered minority. Indeed, as is well known, in cases where the members of a group are anti-​reliable, the
Condorcet reasoning works in reverse, and the chance that the outnumbered minority is
correct approaches one as the lopsidedness of the split increases. So if one has reason to
believe that philosophers are sufficiently unreliable, then the mere fact that a substantial
majority of the community has arrived at a particular view does not give one a reason to be
confident that that view is true.
   While this last point is correct, it is important to recognize that its truth poses no threat
to the main thesis of this chapter. Again, that thesis is that there is no plausible view about
the epistemology of disagreement that would require us to be philosophical agnostics. The
possibility under consideration in this section is the following: if an egalitarian version of
conciliationism turns out to be correct (that is, a version of conciliationism that is very liberal in counting people as “peers”), then we are required to be philosophical agnostics. But
the crucial point is this: there is no plausible view about the epistemology of disagreement
on which you are rationally required to conciliate your opinions with the members of a

       Compare: it is generally thought that the distribution of opinion among climatologists about
whether man-​made global warming is occurring increases, rather than decreases, the justification
that most people have for believing that it is occurring, despite the fact that at least some of those best
positioned to judge believe otherwise. (And despite the fact that the climatologists who believe that it
is occurring did not arrive at that opinion in complete independence of one another.)
    19 According to an important extension of the Condorcet Jury Theorem due to Grofman et al. (1983),

it is not necessary that every member of the group be at least slightly better than chance, only that the
average of their individual probabilities be at least slightly better than chance.

=== p. 390 ===

group that is completely unreliable. For it can be shown mathematically that conciliating
in such circumstances is a suboptimal way to manage your opinions: even if you are as
unreliable as every other member of the group, you would be better off adopting a policy
of simply sticking with your original opinion (Grofman et al. 1983).20 The charitable way
to understand conciliationist views, I believe, is to understand them as tacitly restricted to
domains where the peers are (reasonably believed to be) at least marginally more reliable
than chance with respect to the relevant subject matter. Call this the Minimal Reliability
Proviso.
   Suppose that some version of egalitarian conciliationism is in fact the correct account
when the Minimal Reliability Proviso is satisfied, and that the Proviso is satisfied with
respect to some philosophical questions. In these cases, the correct account of how we
should take the opinions of others into account might very well recommend not agnosticism but rather a relatively confident opinion in the majority view. Of course, even if
egalitarian conciliationism does not proscribe your holding a confident view about some
philosophical issue, it might very well proscribe your holding your own preferred view
about the issue (that is, the view that you would hold if you made up your mind on the basis
of your own assessment of the issue).21 One might try to downplay the significance of this
by emphasizing the following point: in cases where a significant majority has emerged, it
is only the members of the minority who would have to switch positions, so most of those
with a view about the issue could go on believing what they already believed. However,
even for members of the majority, the truth of egalitarian conciliationism would be of significance: for the fact that it is reasonable for them to continue holding the same view is not
because this is the view that they judged most reasonable in the light of the considerations
that bear on it, but rather because of its status as the view favored by the majority. For this
reason, the truth of an egalitarian version of conciliationism would be a matter of great
methodological significance for philosophy, even if such a view would not (as argued here)
support widespread philosophical agnosticism.

   20 Informally, the point is well illustrated by an example suggested by Hud Hudson (personal

correspondence). Imagine a confidence game taking place on a city street corner, in which a crowd of
spectators are playing guess-​which-​cup-​t he-​ball-​is-​under-​t his–​time. There are five cups, one ball, a
dexterous handler, and a lot of people losing money. The dexterous handler isn’t cheating—​he’s simply
very good at getting people to think that they know where the ball is when they don’t. Suppose that
five of us have been watching for some time now, and we each have the same dismal track record of
25%. After closely observing the latest shuffle, four of us report that it seems to us that the ball is under
the far right cup, while it seems to you that the ball is under the far left cup. In these circumstances,
you should not treat the fact that your peers have independently converged on a particular answer as
evidence in favor of that answer and against your own; indeed, you should treat the fact that your peers
have converged on a particular answer as evidence against that answer.
   21 As a referee pointed out to me: although in Elga’s terminology “the spinelessness objection”

refers to the concern that conciliationism will require one to suspend judgment on all controversial
questions (cf. footnote 11), the term “spinelessness” perhaps more naturally suggests a different
objection, namely, that conciliationism does not permit one to stand by one’s own position, even in
cases in which it does permit one to stand by some position.

=== p. 391 ===

                                 5. Conclusion

While it is perhaps unsurprising that steadfast views make room for the possibility of
rationally holding confident opinions about philosophically controversial issues, it is more
surprising that plausible conciliatory views do so as well. Indeed, having argued for the
chapter’s main thesis, we can conclude by offering the following speculative conjecture,
one that stands at variance with much thinking on this topic: when it comes to philosophically controversial issues, those who faithfully adhere to plausible conciliationist views will
often end up more confident than those who faithfully adhere to relatively pure forms of
steadfast views.
   A natural assumption is that, when it comes to fiercely contested issues in philosophy,
conciliatory views of disagreement will license at best relatively diffident, weak opinions (if
not suspension of judgment), while steadfast views will be more hospitable to the holding of
relatively strong, confident opinions. The underlying picture is that conciliatory views will
lead to greater moderation in how one distributes one’s credence among alternative positions in virtue of the weight that one is required to give to the views of others. In contrast,
on a view such as the Right Reasons View, one can in effect ignore the opinions of others so
long as one takes into account the arguments and considerations on which their opinions
are based; freed from such potentially moderating influences and left to one’s own devices,
one ends up with very confident opinions. However, that picture is potentially misleading,
both in what it suggests about conciliatory views as well as in what it suggests about steadfast views. First, a plausible conciliatory view will treat the distribution of peer opinion as
mandating a middling credence only if opinion among the relevant group of people is more
or less evenly split; on the other hand, to the extent that one position emerges as favored
within the group, the conciliatory view will recommend increasingly greater levels of confidence in its correctness. Moreover, a view like the Right Reasons View will recommend a
high degree of confidence in a given philosophical position only if the original, first-​order
evidence and arguments available to the believer really do decisively support that view, as
opposed to a case in which the first-​order evidence is mixed, with genuinely powerful arguments on both sides, in a way that recommends either suspension of judgment or some
middling credence in the best-​supported position.
   Thus, the idea that conciliatory views will require relatively diffident opinions about
controversial philosophical issues, while steadfast views will legitimate relatively strong
opinions, depends on two background assumptions about what tends to be true in such
cases: (i) that the first-​order evidence, when taken by itself, is strong enough to warrant a
confident opinion about the topic, and (ii) that creditable philosophical opinion is not only
divided, but is divided more or less evenly. But on reflection, we seem to have relatively little
reason to think these assumptions are generally true, or even that they hold in most cases.
   With respect to (i): it is independently plausible that, in many cases of the relevant kind,
the evidence that is available to the philosophical community (in the form of arguments,
and so on) is relatively inconclusive, compared to the kind of evidence that one has for
many of one’s non-​philosophical opinions, and is not of a kind that would license a particularly high level of confidence. After all, when it comes to controversial questions in philosophy, we frequently find formidable arguments and considerations pulling in opposite

=== p. 392 ===

directions, and even those arguments that seem compelling often lack the kind of probative force that is had by mathematical proofs, or even the kinds of considerations that can
be brought forward in support of either our best-​confirmed scientific theories or the more
certain of our ordinary beliefs. In such cases, steadfast views that presuppose a permissive conception of rationality will see the “permissibility band” as encompassing a range
of relatively middling credences, with levels of confidence approaching certainty squarely
outside the band. Similarly, the Right Reasons View will not license a high level of confidence either, for the simple reason that such a level of confidence is not warranted by the
original, first-​order evidence.
   With respect to (ii): based on the best information we have about the state of informed
philosophical opinion, it seems that even when such opinion is divided, it is often not
evenly divided: rather, in many cases, such opinion comes down more heavily on one side
than the other. In cases in which informed philosophical opinion divides in a lopsided
manner, plausible conciliatory views will often license the holding of relatively confident
philosophical opinions (at least if there is a significant amount of independence in the way
that those in the majority arrived at their view). This is because we can expect plausible
conciliationist views to accommodate the following epistemic phenomenon: even when no
one is in a particularly strong position to judge whether p, sufficient convergence on p can
make it rational to invest a relatively high degree of confidence in p. For example, if each of
us attempts to read a sign at a distance in poor viewing conditions, the fuzzy visual appearance that is presented to each of us might justify only a weak, tentative belief that the first
word on the sign is “our” as opposed to “out”. However, if it turns out that a substantial
majority of our group weakly judges that the sign reads “our”, then this might justify our
investing a relatively high level of confidence that the sign says “our”, despite the relatively
impoverished character of what each of us had to go on in arriving at that view.
   The sense in which conciliatory views counsel moderation should thus not be misunderstood. Conciliatory views will counsel one to moderate one’s views in response to learning that others who are in a good position to judge think differently, but this is not to be
confused with ending up with moderate opinions in cases in which competent opinion is
unevenly divided. Indeed, it is possible that, when applied to the special case of philosophy,
those who faithfully adhere to conciliatory views of disagreement will often end up more
confident of their controversial philosophical opinions than those who faithfully adhere to
more steadfast views.22

References
Armstrong, David (2006). “The Scope and Limits of Human Knowledge”. Australasian
Christensen, David (2007). “Epistemology of Disagreement: The Good News”. Philosophical
  Review 116(2):187–​217.

   22 Many of the ideas in this paper were presented at a meeting of my Spring 2013 graduate seminar

at Princeton University, which was co-​taught with John Hawthorne. I’d like to thank John and the
students, as well as an anonymous referee for Oxford University Press, for very helpful feedback.

=== p. 393 ===

Christensen, David (2011). “Disagreement, Question-​Begging, and Epistemic Self-​Criticism”.
  Philosophers’ Imprint 11(6): 1–​22.
Christensen, David and Lackey, Jennifer (2013). The Epistemology of Disagreement: New
  Essays. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Elga, Adam (2007). “Reflection and Disagreement”. Noûs 41(3): 478–​502.
Feldman, Richard (2006). “Epistemological Puzzles about Disagreement”. In Hetherington
  (ed.) Epistemology Futures. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 216–​36.
Feldman, Richard (2009). “Evidentialism, Higher-​Order Evidence, and Disagreement”.
  Episteme 6(3): 294–​312.
Feldman, Richard and Warfield, Ted (eds.) (2010). Disagreement. Oxford: Oxford
  University Press.
Frances, Bryan (2010). “The Reflective Epistemic Renegade”. Philosophy and
  Phenomenological Research 81(2): 419–​63.
Frances, Bryan (2013). “Philosophical Renegades”. In Christensen and Lackey, 121–​66.
Fumerton, Richard (2010). “You Can’t Trust a Philosopher”. In Feldman and Warfield, 91–​110.
Goldberg, Sanford (2009). “Reliabilism in Philosophy”. Philosophical Studies 124: 105–​17.
Goldberg, Sanford (2013). “Disagreement, Defeat, and Assertion”. In Christensen and Lackey,
  167–​89.
Grofman, Bernard, Owen, Guillermo, and Feld, Scott L. (1983). “Thirteen Theorems in Search
  of the Truth”. Theory and Decision 15(3): 261–​78.
Kelly, Thomas (2005). “The Epistemic Significance of Disagreement”. In John Hawthorne
  and Tamar Gendler (eds.), Oxford Studies in Epistemology, Volume 1. Oxford: Oxford
  University Press, 167–​96.
Kelly, Thomas (2010). “Peer Disagreement and Higher Order Evidence”. In Feldman and
  Warfield, 111–​74.
Kelly, Thomas (2013a). “Disagreement and the Burdens of Judgment”. In Christensen and
  Lackey, 31–​53.
Kelly, Thomas (2013b). “Evidence Can Be Permissive.” In Steup et al., 298–​313.
Kelly, Thomas (2014). “Believers as Thermometers”. In Jonathan Matheson and Rico Vitz
  (ed.). The Ethics of Belief Oxford: Oxford University Press, 301–​14.
King, Nathan (2012). “Disagreement: What’s the Problem? or A Good Peer is Hard to Find”.
  Philosophy and Phenomenological Research Vol. LXXXV(2): 249–​72.
Kornblith, Hilary (2010). “Belief in the Face of Controversy”. In Feldman and Warfield, 29–​52.
Lasonen-​ Aarnio, Maria (2013). “Disagreement and Evidential Attenuation”. Noûs
  47(4): 767–​94.
Matheson, Jonathan (2009). “Conciliatory Views of Disagreement and Higher-​             Order
  Evidence”. Episteme: A Journal of Social Epistemology 6(3): 269–​79.
McGrath, Sarah (2007). “Moral Disagreement and Moral Expertise”. In Shafer-​Landau (ed.),
  Oxford Studies in Metaethics Vol. 4. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 87–​107.
McGrath, Sarah (2009). “The Puzzle of Pure Moral Deference”. Philosophical Perspectives
  23(1): 321–​44.
McGrath, Sarah (2011). “Skepticism about Moral Expertise as a Puzzle for Moral Realism”.
McGrath, Sarah and Kelly, Thomas (forthcoming). “Are There Any Successful Philosophical
  Arguments?” To appear in an Oxford University Press festschrift for Peter van Inwagen
  edited by John Keller.
Rosen, Gideon (2001). “Nominalism, Naturalism, Epistemic Relativism”. Noûs 35: 69–​91.

=== p. 394 ===

Scanlon, Thomas (2014). Being Realistic About Reasons. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Setiya, Kieran (2012). Knowing Right from Wrong. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Steup, Mathias, Turri, John, and Sosa, Ernest (eds.) (2014) Contemporary Debates in
   Epistemology. 2nd edition. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.
Titelbaum, Michael (2015). “Rationality’s Fixed Point (Or: In Defense of Right Reason)”. In
   John Hawthorne and Tamar Gendler (eds.), Oxford Studies in Epistemology, Volume 5.
   Oxford: Oxford University Press: 253–​94.
van Inwagen, Peter (1996). “‘It is Wrong Everywhere, Always, and for Anyone to Believe
   Anything on Insufficient Evidence’”. In Jordan & Howard-​Snyder (eds.), Faith, Freedom
   and Rationality. Savage, Maryland: Rowman and Littlefield, 137–​54.
van Inwagen, Peter (2006). The Problem of Evil. New York: Oxford University Press.
Weatherson, Brian (2013). “Disagreements, Philosophical, and Otherwise”. In Christensen
   and Lackey, 54–​76.
White, Roger (2013). “Evidence Cannot Be Permisssive”. In Steup et al., 312–​23.

