=== chunk: cappelen-gendler-hawthorne-2016-oxford-handbook/ch27-list-valentini-methodology-political-theory ===
title: List & Valentini, "Methodology of Political Theory"
source_pdf: docs/sources/cappelen-gendler-hawthorne-2016-oxford-handbook/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 542-570
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 525
plan_page_end: 553
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 525 ===

                                   Chapter 27

           The M ethodol ogy of
            Politica l Theory
         Christian List and Laura Valentini

                               1. Introduction

Political theory, sometimes also called “normative political theory”, is a subfield of philosophy and political science that addresses conceptual, normative, and evaluative questions concerning politics and society, broadly construed.1 Examples are: When is a society
just? What does it mean for its members to be free? When is one distribution of goods
socially preferable to another? What makes a political authority legitimate? How should we
make collective decisions? What goals should our policies promote? How should we trade
off different values, such as liberty, prosperity, and security, against one another? What do
we owe, not just to our fellow citizens, but to people in the world at large? Is it permissible to
buy natural resources from authoritarian governments? Can war ever be just?
   Political theory is a long-​established field. Its questions have animated thinkers since
classical antiquity. Consequently, the methods of theorizing and substantive conclusions
are diverse. In this article, we review the methodology of a core branch of contemporary
political theory: the one commonly described as “analytic” political theory.
   Given space constraints, we are not able to cover the history of political thought, the study
of ideologies, the comparative study of political thought across cultures, and “continental” political theory, including “hermeneutic”, “post-​structuralist”, and “post-​modernist”
approaches (for a more comprehensive discussion, see Leopold and Stears 2008). Nonetheless,
the label “analytic” should not be interpreted narrowly. It is meant to refer to an argument-​
based and issue-​oriented, rather than thinker-​based and exegetical, approach that emphasizes logical rigour, terminological precision, and clear exposition. The term “analytic” is not
intended to refer only to the logical and linguistic traditions of philosophy associated with

  1 We are most grateful to Kimberley Brownlee, Emanuela Ceva, Johannes Himmelreich, Mathias

Koenig-​Archibugi, Joseph Mazor, Florian Ostmann, Mike Otsuka, Miriam Ronzoni, and Kai
Spiekermann for extensive and helpful written comments.

=== p. 526 ===

the Vienna Circle and philosophers in Oxford and Cambridge in the first half of the twentieth century. Contemporary analytic political theory goes well beyond conceptual analysis.
At least since the publication of John Rawls’s Theory of Justice (1971/​1999), the development of
normative theories has been one of the field’s central concerns.
   This review is structured as follows. In section 2.1, we briefly demarcate the scope of political theory. In section 3.1, we comment on the analysis of political concepts. In section 4.1,
we introduce the notions of principles and theories, as distinct from concepts. In section
5.1, we discuss the methods of assessing such principles and theories, for the purpose of
justifying or criticizing them. In section 6.1, we review a recent debate on how abstract and
idealized political theory should be. In section 7.1, finally, we discuss the significance of disagreement in political theory.
   One clarification about the nature of this review is needed. Although we cover established ground, we do so from an angle that will be somewhat unfamiliar to at least some
political theorists—​namely, an angle inspired by the philosophy of science. We have chosen this angle with a view to systematizing the activity of analytic political theorizing so as
to make its connections with other fields of philosophy and positive science more transparent. This seems appropriate in the context of a handbook on philosophical methodology.

              2. The Scope of Political Theory

To demarcate the scope of political theory, it is helpful to distinguish it from its most closely
related neighbouring fields: political science, moral philosophy, legal theory, normative
economics, and social ontology. We also offer some comments on the use of the label “political theory”, as opposed to “political philosophy”.

2.1 Political Theory and Political Science
Political theory can easily be distinguished from (positive) political science. Political science addresses empirical and positive questions concerning politics and society (for an
overview, see Goodin 2009). It seeks to describe and explain actual political phenomena,
such as elections and electoral systems, voter behaviour, political-​opinion formation, legislative and governmental behaviour, the interaction between the legislative, executive, and
judicial branches of the state, and the stability or instability of different forms of government. Political theory, by contrast, addresses conceptual, normative, and evaluative questions, such as what a democracy is, how we ought to organize our political systems, and
how to evaluate the desirability of policies.
   Political theory and political science can complement each other. Normative recommendations and evaluations of policies or institutional arrangements often rest on empirical premises. It is hard to arrive at a blueprint for a just society, for example, without
understanding how society actually works, since normative recommendations may have
to respect feasibility constraints (e.g. Gilabert and Lawford-​Smith 2012). Thus political
theory requires political science and the social sciences more generally. Similarly, when

=== p. 527 ===

political scientists investigate, for instance, whether democracy promotes economic development or whether free societies are more politically stable and less corrupt than unfree
ones, they need to know what counts as a democracy or how to define freedom. These questions require the conceptual input of political theorists. Finally, among the large number
of empirical questions that political scientists could investigate, some are undoubtedly
more interesting, relevant, and pressing than others, and political theory can help shape
the research agenda.

2.2 Political Theory and Moral Philosophy
While there is a natural division of labour between political theory and political science,
the distinction between political theory and moral philosophy is subtler. Some scholars view political theory as a subfield of moral philosophy, in which the concepts and
principles from moral philosophy are applied to political—​a nd, more broadly, social—​
problems. If one views political theory in this way but also does not want it to collapse
completely into moral philosophy, one must give a clear criterion of when a problem
counts as “political”.
   Unfortunately, this is not straightforward. For instance, saying that a problem is political if it involves multiple people or their living together may seem plausible, but is too
inclusive. Many problems in personal ethics, such as how to treat one’s relatives or friends,
would count as political on this criterion, even though they are not generally classified in
this way. On the other hand, saying that a problem is political if it involves the state or government is too restrictive, because a number of problems outside the sphere of the state or
government narrowly construed might still be seen as political.
   Consider, for instance, gender relations in civic life or in the workplace, which many
people regard as a political issue. The question of whether, and how, a distinction between
the private or personal domain and the political or social one can be meaningfully drawn
is controversial. Some feminist thinkers have famously challenged the possibility of drawing any such distinction and have endorsed the slogan “the personal is political” (for an
overview, see Baehr 2013). In sum, if one wanted to distinguish political theory from moral
philosophy by referring solely to the substantive domain of problems addressed, one could
at best use some heuristic criterion to capture a conventional distinction, but this would
yield no principled line.
   Another way to distinguish political theory from moral philosophy is to invoke the conditions of theorizing in each field. The aim of moral theorizing, one might say, is to come up
with the correct solution to any given moral problem simpliciter—​t he solution that, based
on the theorist’s comprehensive moral view, is right. The aim of political theory, one might
argue, is different. The political theorist, at least under modern conditions, is engaged in
problem solving under a particular constraint: the presence of pluralism and disagreement
about how to solve the problem at hand (see Rawls 1996; Waldron 1999). Thus any compelling solution to the problems of political theory, such as how to define justice or how to
design a legitimate procedure for collective decision-​making, must appeal to people with a
variety of (reasonable) viewpoints, precisely because those solutions are meant to apply to,
and be acceptable in, pluralistic societies.

=== p. 528 ===

   If we use such a methodological, rather than substantive, criterion for distinguishing
political theory from moral philosophy, we need not worry about identifying a particular
domain of problems that counts as political. Rather, we can say that the hallmark of political theory is its mode of theorizing, against the background of (reasonable) pluralism. We
return to this idea in section 7.1, where we discuss the significance of disagreement in political theory. Of course, substantive and methodological criteria for distinguishing political
theory from moral philosophy can be combined.

2.3 Political Theory and Legal Theory
We now turn to the relationship between political theory and legal theory. The two overlap, and it is difficult to draw a sharp distinction between them. We might again arrive at
a rough distinction by using some heuristic criterion to identify what counts as “legal” or
“related to the law”. As with the attempt to distinguish the “political” from the “private” or
“personal”, however, we cannot expect any such criterion to yield a definitive distinction.
   Alternatively, we might try to distinguish political theory from legal theory by identifying different modes of theorizing associated with each field. For instance, an argument to
the effect that justice simpliciter requires respect for human rights and certain universal
welfare protections is distinct from an argument to the effect that a particular constitution
or kind of legal system, properly interpreted, requires them. One might say that the former
argument belongs to political theory, the latter to legal theory (see the discussion of the
nature of legal interpretation in Dworkin 1986).
   More generally, one might say that the deontic concepts used in legal theory, such as legal
permissibility, legal rights, and legal obligations, are different from their counterparts in
political or moral theory and therefore require a different analysis.2 Still, political theory
and legal theory are best seen as overlapping fields of enquiry.

2.4 Political Theory and Normative Economics
Political theory also overlaps with normative economics, especially with social choice and
welfare theory. Social choice and welfare theory is the formal, but also normative and evaluative, study of (i) collective decision-​making procedures, (ii) mechanisms for allocating
benefits and burdens in society, and (iii) methods by which a social planner, policy maker,
or institutional designer can assess the goodness or desirability of different social states,
policies, or institutions. Normative economists investigate these—​(i), (ii), and (iii)—​by
introducing desiderata that any reasonable procedure, mechanism, or method is required
to satisfy, and then asking which procedures, mechanisms, or methods, if any, satisfy the
given desiderata. (For a survey, see List 2013.)

  2 Of course, even within legal theory, one can distinguish between what is legally permissible

according to a specific set of laws (e.g. those of a particular country) and what the standard of legal
permissibility should be.

=== p. 529 ===

   The substantive questions addressed in social choice and welfare theory are similar to
some of those addressed in political theory. For example, questions such as how to distribute benefits and burdens are addressed by political theorists and normative economists
alike. Indeed, Rawls’s Theory of Justice was, in part, influenced by the normative works of
economists such as Kenneth Arrow (1951), John Harsanyi (1955), and Amartya Sen (1970).
Similarly, normative economists frequently draw on moral and political theory. For example, John Roemer’s (1998) formal work on distributive justice is influenced by G. A. Cohen’s
(1995) work in political theory; and the work on variable-​population social choice by Charles
Blackorby, Walter Bossert, and David Donaldson (2005) is influenced by Derek Parfit’s
(1984) work on population ethics.
   Arguably, the main difference between political theory and social choice and welfare
theory is not a substantive one (although the former is broader than the latter), but a methodological one. Mainstream political theory is a non-​formal discipline, making at most
limited use of formal methods from mathematics, logic, and economics, while social choice
and welfare theory is predominantly formal.

2.5 Political Theory and Social Ontology
A less well-​k nown but growing field in the neighbourhood of political theory is social
ontology. Social ontology investigates the nature of phenomena such as joint intentions,
collective actions, social norms and conventions, group agency, and institutions (e.g.
Gilbert 1989; Pettit 1993; Searle 1995; Bratman 1999; Tollefsen 2002; Tuomela 2007; List and
Pettit 2011). Its central question, roughly speaking, is: What are the building blocks of the
social world, and how are they related to one another, to the individuals involved, and to
the physical world?
   The substantive questions in social ontology are distinct from those in political
theory and in some respects prior to them. Social ontology is primarily a positive and
explanatory field rather than a normative or evaluative one. Its relevance to political
theory lies in the fact that political theory cannot get off the ground unless we are clear
about what entities and properties exist in the social world. For example, before we
can answer questions about rights, obligations, and responsibilities, we need to know
what entities can be the bearers of rights, obligations, and responsibilities. Are these
restricted to individuals, or do they also include certain collectives? Should we regard
the state as an agent, as a mere collection of individuals, or as some kind of special fiction? Similarly, before we can answer the question of what is or is not socially desirable,
we need to know what the possible objects of value might be. It is difficult to determine,
for instance, whether there should be any cultural rights or state subsidies for cultural
activities unless we can give at least a partial answer to the question of what we mean by
“culture”.
   Since different social-​ontological theories give us different accounts of what entities and
properties there are in the social world, they can, in turn, impose constraints on what the
possible objects of analysis in political theory might be.

=== p. 530 ===

2.6 Political Theory and Political Philosophy
Although some scholars distinguish between political theory and political philosophy, this
is mainly a conventional distinction. It refers, roughly, to the different styles of political
theory conducted in political science and philosophy departments, respectively, especially
in North America. (In the UK, much of what is conventionally called “political philosophy”
is traditionally conducted in political science departments.) Arguably, “political theory” is
the slightly more inclusive and interdisciplinary label, referring not only to philosophical
work but also to a variety of other approaches. As mentioned, here we focus specifically on
the analytic branch of political theory.

                3. Concepts in Political Theory

A long-​standing concern in political theory is the analysis of political concepts: freedom,
equality, justice, authority, legitimacy, democracy, welfare, and so on. Each of these has
been interpreted and defined in numerous ways, and political theory can help us clarify
the advantages and disadvantages of different interpretations and definitions. The bulk of
political theory in the decades prior to the publication of Rawls’s A Theory of Justice was
conceptual analysis.3
   The analysis of political concepts is relevant, not only to normative theory building (e.g.
any theory of liberalism must employ some concept of liberty) but also, as already noted, to
positive work in political science. Thus conceptual analysis is, in some sense, the least normative or evaluative part of political theory.
   Of course, when we analyse concepts such as freedom and democracy, we are usually
interested in the kinds of freedom and democracy that we find valuable or normatively
required. Hence the ultimate motivation for our analysis may well be a normative or evaluative one: we may wish to clarify these concepts in order to express normative or evaluative
principles in terms of them. Logically, however, the question of how to understand freedom and democracy is distinct from the question of whether freedom and democracy so
understood are valuable. Indeed, political scientists may sometimes be interested primarily in whether freedom or democracy can serve as independent variables in explanations of
political phenomena (e.g. when they investigate whether freedom promotes prosperity or
whether democracies are less prone to fighting wars against one another), irrespective of
any considerations of value.4 In this section, we introduce some key ideas relevant to the
analysis of political concepts.

     For a classic work on political concepts, see Oppenheim (1981).
     Of course, political scientists may also consider freedom or democracy as dependent variables,
such as when they ask which social and economic conditions promote each. Think, for instance, of
the literature on the transition to, and consolidation of, democracy (e.g. Linz and Stepan 1996). In
such studies, considerations of value may plausibly affect our choice of interpretation of the relevant
concepts.

=== p. 531 ===

3.1 What is a Concept?
We use concepts to categorize or classify objects.5 The concept democracy, for example, may
help us distinguish between those forms of government that are democratic and those that
are not. The concept legitimacy, in relation to acts of state coercion, may help us distinguish
between those acts of state coercion that are legitimate and those that are not.
   For the purposes of this article, we assume that any concept has a domain of application.
This is the set of objects of which it is meaningful to ask whether they fall under the given
concept or not. We might say, for example, that the domain of the concept democracy is
the set of all systems of government or decision-​making. For any object in that set—​t hat
is, any system of government or decision-​making—​we can meaningfully ask whether it
is democratic or not. By contrast, for objects outside that domain, it is not meaningful to
ask whether they are democratic or not. It makes no sense to ask, for instance, whether an
equilateral triangle or a mountain is democratic or not (cf. Dworkin 1986, 75). Note that
the domain of the concept democracy—​or justice, or freedom, and so on—​can be variously
specified; we will return to that point.
   Further, any “classically well-​behaved” concept has defining conditions. These determine, for any object in the concept’s domain, whether that object falls under the concept (“satisfies it”) or not. In our example, the question of whether a particular system of
government or decision-​making, say the political system of Iceland, is democratic or not
depends on a variety of features of that system: how decisions are made, who participates
in those decisions, how the participants provide their input, how the decisions are implemented and by whom, and so on.
   Philosophers are divided over the extent to which concepts in general have defining
conditions (for a review, see e.g. Margolis and Laurence 2012). Many of our common-​
sense concepts arguably lack such conditions. We may be able to pick out some paradigm
instances (or “prototypes”) of redness or beauty, but may be unable to arrive at clear-​cut
necessary and sufficient conditions that an object must satisfy to be red or beautiful (for
a related discussion, see Dworkin 1986, ch. 2). By contrast, in theoretical work, it is usually desirable to look for concepts with defining conditions. Occasionally, however, some
theoretical concepts may be regarded as undefined “primitives” or as characterizable only
through “prototypes”.
   Finally, a concept’s extension is the subset of the domain consisting of precisely those
objects that fall under the concept (“that satisfy it”). If the concept has defining conditions, these determine the extension. The extension of the concept democracy is the set of
all those systems of government or decision-​making that, according to the concept, count
as democratic. More generally, there can be “non-​binary” concepts, which do not subdivide objects into those falling under the concept and those not falling under it, but which

   5 We here cannot discuss the ontological status of concepts, on which there are several rival views

in philosophy. Instead, we rely on a relatively simple characterization of concepts, emphasizing the
fact that we use concepts to categorize or classify objects and that they serve as ingredients in the
activity of political theorizing. For a broader discussion of concepts as the constituents of thoughts,
see Margolis and Laurence (2012). For a cognitive-​science treatment of concepts as locations or regions
within “conceptual spaces”, see Gärdenfors (2000).

=== p. 532 ===

instead classify objects on one or several dimensions that may each admit of degrees. For
example, equality and welfare are non-​binary concepts. The level of equality or inequality in a particular distribution of goods is a matter of degree, and different interpretations
of equality give us different accounts of when one distribution counts as more equal than
another (see e.g. Sen 1980). Similarly, a person’s welfare is a matter of degree and, on some
accounts, even given by a vector of multiple attributes, representing different dimensions
or aspects of welfare. Sen (1987) has argued for the “constitutive plurality” of the concept
standard of living: there are multiple dimensions on which a person’s standard of living can
be categorized.
   For practically any salient concept in political theory, there are debates about what the
domain of application is, what the defining conditions, if any, are, and which objects belong
to the concept’s extension and which do not. Just think of the many different ways in which
the concept democracy may be understood. The domain of application may be specified in
a variety of ways: for example, as a set of voting procedures, as a set of decisions, or as a set
of entire political systems. Similarly, we may be divided over the defining conditions that
determine whether something is democratic or not: for example, do only formal, constitutional features of the political system matter, or are features of actual political practices relevant as well, and if so, how? And is democracy precisely definable at all? In consequence,
we may end up with different extensions of the concept democracy (see e.g. Christiano
2008; List 2011). Similar considerations also hold for other key political concepts, such as
justice, freedom, equality, and legitimacy. Indeed, many political concepts are what political theorists call “essentially contested” (Gallie 1955).

3.2 Concepts and Conceptions
Political theorists, following Rawls, who in turn follows H. L. A. Hart, sometimes distinguish between concepts and conceptions (Rawls 1971/​1999, 5). Concepts, in that terminology, are less fully specified than conceptions. For example, we may have a broadly outlined
concept of freedom as the absence of constraints on agents’ actions, which still leaves open
what kinds of constraints, agents, and actions matter (MacCallum 1967). A full specification of those constraints, agents, and actions yields a precise conception of freedom.
Different conceptions can thus be compatible with the same broad concept.
   We can translate the distinction between concepts and conceptions into our earlier terminology by defining a conception exactly as we defined a concept in the last section, where
the domain, defining conditions (if any), and extension are fully specified, and redefining a
concept as a broader family of such conceptions, with some aspects of the domain, defining
conditions, or extension left open.

3.3 Desiderata on Concepts
The following is a list of desiderata that systematize requirements often implicitly employed
by political theorists engaging in conceptual analysis:

=== p. 533 ===

   Respecting our intuitions: We may want to interpret a concept, such as freedom or democracy, in a way that is broadly in line with our intuitions, especially if this concept has
a common-​sense interpretation. If we arrived at an interpretation of freedom that classifies some intuitively clear cases of unfreedom as instances of freedom, or vice versa, this
would be suspect. For example, G. A. Cohen has famously criticized Robert Nozick’s “moralized” conception of freedom (according to which freedom is, roughly, the absence of
rights-​v iolating interference) on the grounds that it delivers counterintuitive judgements,
such as that a justly imprisoned criminal is not unfree (G. A. Cohen 1988). Similarly, we
would be disturbed if our interpretation of democracy classified some clear-​cut cases of
tyranny as democratic. In such cases, we would either have to give strong reasons for overruling our intuitive judgements or search for a better interpretation of the concept. Later,
we discuss Rawls’s method of reflective equilibrium, which may help us adjudicate cases in
which our theoretical conclusions conflict with our intuitive judgments (Rawls 1971/​1999;
Daniels 2013).
   Playing the right normative, evaluative, or descriptive role: We may be interested in a concept because we wish to use it in some normative or evaluative principle or in some explanation in political science. A good interpretation of the concept is one that successfully
plays the intended normative, evaluative, or descriptive role. Different roles might require
different interpretations of the concept. For example, if we want the concept of justice to
offer a comprehensive picture of how society should be organized, we are likely to develop a
thicker account of it than if we understand justice as one value among the many that should
guide institutional design (Rawls 1971/​1999; G. A. Cohen 2008, 271–​2). However, to avoid
a proliferation of rival interpretations of the same concept, we might also be looking for a
single interpretation that can successfully play multiple roles.
   Standing in the right relationship to other concepts: Since we typically employ concepts
not in isolation but in connection with other concepts, we may require these concepts to
be related to each other in the right way. If we take rights to entail obligations, for example,
our interpretation of rights may constrain the way in which we can consistently interpret
obligations. Sometimes we may wish some concepts to be directly inter-​definable. It is often
held, for instance, that the concept permissibility must be definable in terms of the corresponding concept obligatoriness and vice versa: it is permissible that p if and only if it is not
obligatory that not p. Consequently, our joint analysis of permissibility and obligatoriness
must respect this constraint. Finally, we may wish some given concepts to be sufficiently
“differentiated” from one another, in order to avoid redundancies or confusions. (For a
related discussion of concept formation in the social sciences, see Gerring 1999.)
   Having defining conditions that are neither too “thick” nor too “thin”: Even when we have
settled the domain of a given concept (e.g. we focus on a concept of freedom whose domain
is a set of acts, as opposed to a set of agents or institutional arrangements), we might still be
divided over the concept’s defining conditions. In the case of freedom, a huge variety of different defining conditions have been proposed (for overviews, see Carter 2012; Lovett 2013).
To narrow down the range of possibilities, we might require that the defining conditions be
neither too “thick”, nor too “thin”: they should not refer to any “irrelevant” facts about the
objects to be categorized, but refer to all “relevant” facts. There can then be debates about
which facts are or are not relevant and what counts as too “thick” or too “thin”. For example, a concept is moralized if its defining conditions refer to some normative or evaluative

=== p. 534 ===

facts. A concept is non-​moralized otherwise.6 Nozick’s concept of freedom as the absence of
rights-​v iolating interference, which we have mentioned earlier, is moralized in this sense.
Political theorists are often divided over which concepts in political theory should be moralized. Similarly, a concept is modally demanding if its defining conditions refer not only
to facts about the actual world but also to facts about other possible worlds—​t hat is, facts
about what would be or might be, not merely about what is. A concept is modally undemanding otherwise. Pettit, for instance, argues that freedom is modally demanding: a slave
with a benevolent, non-​interfering master still counts as unfree, because there is a nearby
possible world in which the master interferes (Pettit 1997). Similarly, concepts such as security and peace are arguably modally demanding, referring not only to the absence of relevant harmful actions or military conflicts in the actual world but also their continued
absence in a range of nearby possible worlds. Political theorists are divided over which, if
any, concepts should be modally demanding (see e.g. Pettit 2011; Southwood 2013).
   Having defining conditions that are epistemically accessible: Depending on the intended
use of a concept, we may require its defining conditions to be such that it is possible, at least
in principle, for us to know whether an object meets them. For example, a concept of welfare whose defining conditions refer to certain kinds of mental states that are in principle
inaccessible to any observer would be of little practical use. Similarly, the defining conditions of justice under Robert Nozick’s account, which refer to the entire history of transactions leading to the current distribution of entitlements, fail to meet this desideratum and
thus render Nozick’s account somewhat practically inert (Nozick 1974). Of course, the context and intended use may determine what counts as epistemically accessible.

3.4 What Concepts are Not
Concepts should not be confused with principles or theories—​t he topic of sections 4.1 and
5.1. In particular, principles and theories have propositional content and may be true or
false, while concepts, by themselves, cannot be true or false. They only categorize objects
and, in doing so, can be more or less useful, more or less plausible, and more or less in line
with established use or with our considered judgements.7 To give a simple illustration from
outside political theory, the concepts red, green, or triangular are neither true nor false.
Only statements in which they occur can have truth-​values, such as “tomatoes are red”
(true), “snow is green” (false), and “rectangles are triangular” (false).
   Even if we have a full account of when a political system is democratic or what it means
for someone to be free, this still leaves open the question of whether democracy or freedom are desirable and whether we ought to promote each of them. We need principles or
theories—​making statements such as “we ought to respect freedom” or “we ought to make
decisions democratically”—​to address the latter questions. Such principles or theories are
then capable of being true or false. Simply put, concepts can serve as building blocks of
principles, which can serve as building blocks of theories.

     The definition of moralized and non-​moralized concepts requires suitable adjustments if there
are no evaluative or normative facts.
  7 Recall that the defining conditions of any concept simply specify when an object falls under the

concept, not whether the concept is true or false.

=== p. 535 ===

   Still, people sometimes say things such as “freedom as non-​interference is the true conception of freedom”. Assertions of this kind are best interpreted as abbreviations for claims
such as “freedom as non-​interference is the conception of freedom that is, in some relevant sense, most appropriate”, which, in turn, could mean that it best captures our established use of freedom or alternatively our considered judgments about what counts as free.
Literally, however, the claim that one concept of freedom is the true one is not meaningful,
since only things with propositional content can have truth-​values. Concepts do not have
propositional content: the extension of a concept is not a set of possible worlds (which is
what the extension of a proposition is), but a set of objects.8
   Even on its charitable interpretation in terms of appropriateness, the assertion “freedom
as non-​interference is the true conception of freedom” is ambiguous. As noted, it would
have to be understood as implying that, among the many different interpretations of freedom, one stands out as “most appropriate”. But, unless we specify a criterion of appropriateness, there is no unique such interpretation. For example, one interpretation may be
most in line with our common-​sense use of the word “freedom”, another most in line with
our considered judgements about what counts as free, a third most suitable for playing a
particular role in a theory of justice. Different criteria of appropriateness may diverge, and
there is no application-​independent criterion. Thus expressions such as “the true conception of freedom” are, at best, shorthand for more elaborate expressions involving criteria of
appropriateness. To avoid ambiguity, it is best to spell those out explicitly.

       4. Principles and Theories in Political

While analytic political theory until the early 1970s was primarily concerned with the analysis of concepts, John Rawls’s Theory of Justice (1971/​1999) invigorated the quest for theories
and the principles underlying them. Rawls formulated some principles of justice, which are
the basis of his theory of how we should organize the “basic structure of society”, namely its
main political, legal, and economic institutions.
   In this section, we discuss the notions of principles and theories. Although these are
widely used in political theory, they are seldom carefully defined. We hope, therefore, that
our discussion will be clarifying.

4.1 What is a Principle?
A principle is a statement—​a proposition expressed in language—​that applies, at least
potentially, to more than one case. Usually, this is marked by the occurrence of expressions
with appropriate quantifiers, such as “for all X, subject to certain conditions, Y is the case”.
A principle is evaluative if it has evaluative content: for instance, it includes evaluative

     Note that the extension of a statement or proposition is the set of those possible worlds in which
the statement or proposition is true.

=== p. 536 ===

predicates or concepts such as good or bad, better or worse, desirable or undesirable. A principle is normative if it has normative content: for instance, it includes deontic operators
such as ought, may, permissible, obligatory, right, or wrong. A principle without any evaluative or normative content is positive. Such principles are common in the sciences; think of
the principle of conservation of energy in physics.
   Classic examples of normative principles are the Ten Commandments from the Bible,
the Golden Rule (“You should treat other people in the way in which you would like them
to treat you”), Bentham’s principle of utility (“An action is right if it maximizes total utility”), and more recently, Rawls’s principles of justice. Roughly speaking, these state that
each person is entitled to the most extensive system of individual liberties, compatible
with a similar system for everyone else (the “equal-​liberty principle”); and socio-​economic
inequalities are permissible if and only if they are compatible with a system of fair equal
opportunities (the “fair equality of opportunity principle”) and benefit the least well-​off
members of society (the “difference principle”) (Rawls 1971/​1999).
   The propositional content of a principle is the set of all its implications. Sometimes this
propositional content may depend on auxiliary assumptions. As already noted, their
having propositional content sets principles apart from concepts, which merely offer
categorizations.

4.2 What is a Theory?
The word “theory” is commonly used in two distinct senses. First, it can refer to an entire
academic field or area of enquiry, such as when we speak of “political theory” or “economic
theory” as general areas to which curricula or scholarly journals are devoted. Second, the
word can refer to a specific theory within such an area, such as Rawls’s theory of justice,
the theory of the firm in economics, or Newton’s theory of physics. Our focus here is on
theories in this second, specific sense. Surprisingly, there exists no canonical definition of a
theory in that sense in political theory.
    To provide a starting point, we propose a simple definition inspired by the philosophy
of science but adapted to the present context.9 We define a theory as a set of statements—​
propositions expressed in language—​which is a candidate for playing some theoretical
or practical role and which is, ideally, representable as the set of all implications of some
underlying principles. The set of principles from which the theory can be derived—​if there
is such a set—​is called the theory formulation.
    Although loose and abstract, this definition has some merits. First, it allows us to view
positive theories (in the sciences) and normative or evaluative theories (in moral philosophy or political theory) as instances of the same general category. Second, it makes transparent the differences between them. For example, the roles played by theories can range

   9 We here follow broadly what is often called the syntactic approach to defining theories (where a

theory is defined as a set of sentences/​propositions with certain properties); it is arguably the most
conventional approach. For a classic exposition, see Quine (1975). It is also worth exploring the rival
semantic approach (where a theory is defined as a set of models with certain properties), but given
space constraints, we set this aside here (see van Fraassen 1980). For an introduction to the philosophy
of science, see Okasha (2002).

=== p. 537 ===

from descriptive, explanatory, and predictive (in the case of positive theories) to evaluative and prescriptive (in the case of evaluative or normative theories). Third, the definition
allows us to identify the special challenges that arise when we construct and assess normative or evaluative theories.
   Paradigmatic examples of theories according to our definition are Newton’s theory of
physics and Rawls’s theory of justice. Each can be viewed as a set of statements, entailed
by some underlying principles, which can play a descriptive, explanatory, or prescriptive
role. Newton’s theory is the set of all statements entailed by Newton’s principles of physics,
perhaps together with some empirical premises about the solar system or other physical
systems of interest. It can be used, for instance, to explain and predict the trajectory of the
planets around the sun and to guide such engineering projects as travelling to the moon
and safely back. Rawls’s theory is the set of all statements entailed by Rawls’s principles of
justice, perhaps together with some empirical premises about relevant social conditions.
It can play a prescriptive or normative role, guiding us in the design of social institutions
(for an earlier discussion of the relationship between normative and positive theories, see
McDermott 2008).
   For our purposes, the biggest structural difference between Newton’s and Rawls’s
theories is that one is positive and the other normative. Indeed, the principles underlying Newton’s theory are positive principles, while those underlying Rawls’s are normative
ones. Generally, a theory is positive if it has no evaluative or normative content; it is evaluative or normative if it has such content. Evaluative theories that offer evaluations of “goodness” or “betterness” are also called axiological.
   Earlier, we associated evaluative content with the occurrence of evaluative predicates or
concepts, such as good, better, desirable, and so on, and normative content with the occurrence of deontic operators, such as ought, may, and so on. Different accounts of what qualifies as evaluative or normative content can be given, and we need not commit ourselves to
one such account here. On any reasonable account, Rawls’s theory will come out as normative and Newton’s theory as positive.
   While Newton’s and Rawls’s theories are paradigmatic instances of our definition,
a theory need not be self-​consciously theoretical. A set of rough and informal principles
describing how ordinary objects behave when pushed, dropped, or thrown can constitute
a “folk” theory of motion that is predictively useful in everyday contexts. Similarly, a set of
basic principles describing how animals respond to noise, movement, and the presence of
humans may constitute a simple predictive theory of animal behaviour that members of
hunter–​gatherer societies might have used to guide their actions. We also routinely employ
normative theories without self-​consciously doing so. For example, a set of simple principles specifying how we should or should not treat others may constitute a simple “folk”
theory of personal ethics.

4.3 The Distinction Between a Theory and the Support for It
Our simple definition of a theory is silent on whether the theory is true, useful, or good
in some sense. A theory that is false, irrelevant, or superseded still counts as a theory.
Describing something as a theory carries no assessment of its truth or acceptability. Thus

=== p. 538 ===

the most far-​fetched and implausible conspiracy theory—​for example, in science or in
history—​still qualifies as a theory.
   Similarly, the attempt to downgrade a set of statements by asserting “it is only a theory”, as
critics of evolutionary theory or global-​warming sceptics sometimes do when they describe
their target, makes little sense. Calling something a theory is consistent with its being well
supported and true, just as it is consistent with its being speculative and even false.
   An important distinction is that between a theory and what is offered in its support. A
theory, as we have defined it, is distinct from any arguments, evidence, or justification given
for it. For example, Newton’s actual or hypothetical experiments—​such as how an apple fell
onto his head (though supposedly a myth)—​are not part of his physical theory itself: they
are part of the evidence he had for that theory. Similarly, Rawls’s arguments in support of
his principles of justice, such as his original-​position thought experiment (a hypothetical
choice situation in which the parties to the social contract must agree on principles governing the basic structure of society), are not strictly speaking part of his theory of justice
itself. The original-​position thought experiment, like any physical experiment or any social
scientist’s observation, is offered in support of the theory in question. Thus Rawls’s book, A
Theory of Justice, consists of the theory itself (everything entailed by his principles of justice), together with arguments in support of it (most notably, the original-​position thought
experiment and reflective-​equilibrium considerations), comparisons with rival theories
(such as utilitarianism), and a fair amount of commentary on the theory’s interpretation
and its applications. This distinction, between a theory and the argument or evidence in
support of it, will help us clarify some recent methodological debates in political theory,
about abstraction and idealization, which we discuss in Section 6.
   An important task, separate from defining a theory, is therefore to identify the requirements for a good, or acceptable, theory, and to spell out how we can assess it.

               5. The Assessment of Principles
                        and Theories

There are two kinds of criteria that we may use to assess—​especially to justify or to
criticize—​principles and theories: “internal” and “external” criteria. The former concern
the way the principles or theory are formulated and their internal logical structure. Criteria
such as consistency and parsimony fall into this category. The latter concern the relationship between the principles or theory and what these are “about”: their normative or evaluative content, in analogy with the empirical or descriptive content of a scientific theory.
Criteria such as truth or normative adequacy (in analogy with truth or empirical adequacy
in science) fall into this second category. In this section, we discuss the two kinds of criteria
(“internal” and “external”) in turn.
   Throughout this discussion, we focus on theories, rather than principles, as the units of
assessment. This is no loss of generality. We are usually interested, not in individual principles in isolation, but in sets of principles that we wish to assess together. If we wish to assess
a principle by itself, we can view it as a special case of a theory, namely a theory that consists
just of the principle and its implications.

=== p. 539 ===

5.1 Internal Criteria
Although we have kept our definition of a theory deliberately thin, defining it simply as a set
of statements that may play some theoretical or practical role and that is, ideally, derivable
from some underlying principles, we usually want theories to satisfy some further requirements. We now discuss several common criteria for assessing a theory’s internal structure.
Like our definition of a theory, they are inspired by the sciences, but apply to normative and
evaluative theories as much as they apply to positive ones. Some of the criteria are so obvious that they are often left unacknowledged; nonetheless, it is useful to make them explicit.
   Consistency: We require a good theory to be logically consistent. Formally, the set of
statements constituting the theory must be capable of being simultaneously true. An obvious reason for requiring consistency is that anything follows from an inconsistent set of
statements (ex falso quodlibet). Thus an inconsistent set, such as one containing both “p”
and “not p”, is of little use, whether for explanatory, predictive, evaluative, or prescriptive
purposes. By entailing everything, it is too indiscriminate.10
   Deductive closure: We require a good theory to be deductively closed. This means that
any statement that is logically entailed by the theory also belongs to the theory.11 The idea
underlying deductive closure is that we want to be able to identify a theory with everything
to which the theory is logically committed. If the theory asserts “p” and “if p then q”, for
example, then it should also assert “q”. We would consider a theory defective if it were committed to the first two statements, but not to the third. The way we characterized Newton’s
and Rawls’s theories had deductive closure built into it, since we characterized each as the
set of all statements that are logically entailed by the relevant principles. Deductive closure
is easy to achieve even when a theory is initially given in a form that violates it: we can
re-​define the theory as the set of all statements entailed by the original, non-​deductively-​
closed formulation.12
   Axiomatizability: This requirement is implicit in the final clause of our definition of a
theory, which says that a theory should ideally be representable as the set of all implications of some underlying principles. Formally, a theory is axiomatizable if there exists a
finite set of principles such that the entire theory can be expressed as their body of implications.13 It should be evident from our earlier discussion that Newton’s and Rawls’s theories
are usually presented in axiomatized form, as the bodies of implications of Newton’s and
Rawls’s principles, respectively, perhaps together with some auxiliary assumptions. An

   10 Sometimes we may be prepared to lower the bar of consistency, by admitting some “contained”

or “local” inconsistencies, as in so-​called “paraconsistent” logics. Even then, we usually impose some
weakened variant of a consistency requirement, to rule out those inconsistencies that are too global to
preserve a theory’s usefulness.
      A set of statements is deductively closed if it contains all its implications.
      The deductive-​closure requirement also highlights, once more, why consistency matters. Since
an inconsistent set of statements entails everything, deductive closure would force such a theory
to consist of everything that can be expressed in the relevant language, which would amount to a
completely uninformative theory. Again, if we were to use a paraconsistent logic, we might weaken the
requirement of deductive closure but still retain some less demanding requirement in a similar spirit.
   13 See also Quine (1975). Note that any axiomatizable theory is deductively closed. Note, further,

that logicians sometimes replace the “finiteness” requirement with a weaker “formal decidability”
requirement; we set these technicalities aside.

=== p. 540 ===

axiomatizable theory can be presented in an informative manner, simply by specifying the
set of principles from which it can be derived. If the theory could only be presented by brute
enumeration of all its implications—​t ypically infinitely many—​t here would be no succinct
way of summarizing its content. A good theory illuminates its subject matter by giving us
a manageable set of principles—​a manageable theory formulation—​t hat encodes the theory’s entire propositional content.
   Parsimony: We require a good theory to avoid any unnecessary complexity, and to be as
simple as possible, in an appropriate sense of simplicity (on simplicity, see e.g. Baker 2013).14
Scientists commonly care about parsimony, often under the label “Occam’s razor”, and
Rawls, for instance, also emphasizes simplicity as a virtue of a normative theory.15 What
counts as “simple” may be different from context to context and may also depend on what
the theory is about. We usually want to find the simplest theory able to account for its subject matter. To be illuminating, the theory ought to be simpler, for example, than the target
phenomenon it seeks to account for, as well as simpler than its rival theories. A scientific
theory, for instance, should be simpler and more succinct than an enumeration of all the
empirical facts it seeks to explain; otherwise it cannot play any explanatory role. Likewise,
a good normative theory should be simpler than an enumeration of all case-​specific normative judgements. The relevant bar of simplicity may be adjusted depending on the theory’s subject matter.
   The present list of criteria for the internal assessment of theories is only illustrative, not
exhaustive, but given space constraints, we now move on to external criteria.

5.2 External Criteria
We defined a theory as a set of statements that is a candidate for playing some theoretical
or practical role. Implicit in this definition is the idea that there is something the theory is
about: any theory is intended to represent, summarize, or capture something “outside the
theory”. It may capture this correctly, in which case the theory is true, correct, or externally
valid, or it may fail to do so, in which case it is false, incorrect, or externally invalid.
   What exactly a given theory is intended to represent needs to be spelt out further. In the
case of a physical theory, the answer is relatively straightforward, especially if we accept
“scientific realism”: it is intended to represent certain physical facts about the world, such
as facts about how physical objects behave in response to each other (see e.g. Chakravartty
2013). In the case of a normative or evaluative theory, the picture is more complicated. If we
are realists about normative or evaluative matters, we may say that the theory is intended
to represent some theory-​independent moral facts. If we are not realists about normative or
evaluative matters, it is harder to specify what a normative or evaluative theory is intended

      Although axiomatizability of a theory in terms of some easily expressible principles is one of the
marks of parsimony, axiomatizability is not a sufficient condition for parsimony.
   15 In his discussion of why his principles of justice are preferable to utilitarian principles, Rawls

says that “reasonable risk aversion may be so great, once the enormous hazards of the decision in the
original position are fully appreciated, that the utilitarian weighting may be, for practical purposes, so
close to the difference principle as to make the simplicity of the latter … decisive in its favour” (Rawls
1999, 144 emphasis added).

=== p. 541 ===

to represent (on moral realism and anti-​realism see, respectively, Sayre-​McCord 2011;
Joyce 2009).
   Yet the very idea of a theory breaks down unless we assume that there is something
potentially representable by it, however observer-​dependent or socially constructed it
might be.16 If we were nihilists, to take an extreme example of the denial of any normative
or evaluative facts, we would not be able to engage in normative or evaluative theorizing in
earnest.
   Thus, in this section, we assume that normative or evaluative theories are truth-​apt: it
makes sense to ask whether they are true—​or, some might prefer to say: correct or externally valid. We thus accept a form of “cognitivism” about such theories. This assumption
is still compatible with a variety of views about the “meta-​ethical” status of normative or
evaluative judgements. We return to some of these issues in section 7.1. Granting, then,
that there is some standard of correctness by which we can assess normative or evaluative
theories (an ontological assumption), we still need to know how to do this assessment (an
epistemological question). We now review several methods of testing a theory for external
validity.
   Taking intuitive judgments as strict evidence: According to this method, the test for a
normative or evaluative theory is whether it fits our intuitive judgements about the relevant normative or evaluative matters. On this approach, our intuitive judgements have
the same status as empirical observations in science. In science, a theory is empirically
adequate if it entails the correct observation statements (see e.g. Quine 1975; van Fraassen
1980). Similarly, in moral and political theory, we might call a theory normatively or evalu-atively adequate if it entails the correct normative or evaluative statements. According to
the strict-​evidence method, these are precisely the normative or evaluative statements supported by our intuitive judgements (cf. the discussion in Dworkin 1975). Although simple
and analogous to familiar scientific methods, this method has some problems. First, while
we may be confident in some of our normative or evaluative judgements, other judgements
may be more tentative, and in some cases—​especially when the issue is less familiar—​we
may not have any firm intuitions at all. Second, our intuitive judgements may be subject
to biases and framing effects, which may cast further doubt on their reliability. Third,
our normative or evaluative judgements may not be consistent with one another, or they
may entail other judgements that we reject on reflection; in such cases, the strict-​evidence
method provides no guidance at all.
   Reflective equilibrium: A more refined method of theory testing is the reflective-​equilibrium method. It does not treat our intuitions as independent evidence, prior to the theory
in question, but requires us to reach a “mutual fit” between the theory and our considered
judgements. This works as follows. We begin with some initial theory, perhaps inspired by
our initial intuitive judgements or given by some prima facie principles, then consider the
implications of the theory and ask whether they are also in line with our judgements. If
those implications fit our judgements, the process stops. It is more likely, however, that only

  16 A constructivist might take a theory to represent certain constructed facts. This is consistent

even with the view that the theory itself is the “vehicle” by which those facts are being constructed.
To develop that view further, one might draw, for instance, on parallels with Searle’s analysis of
declarative speech acts (which—​roughly—​bring certain facts into existence by representing them).
See Searle (1995).

=== p. 542 ===

some of the theory’s implications fit our judgements, while others do not. We then reassess
both the theory and our judgements. In some cases, we may decide, on reflection, to revise
the theory by changing some of the constituent principles, so as to bring the theory in line
with the judgements we are unwilling to give up. In other cases, we may decide to overrule
our judgements and embrace the theory’s implications as our new considered judgements.
A reflective equilibrium is reached when the implications of our possibly revised theory
are in line with our possibly revised judgements. At least since Rawls’s Theory of Justice,
reflective equilibrium has been one of the most widely used methods in political theory
(Rawls 1999, 15–​18, 40–​6; Daniels 2013). Its details can be spelt out in a variety of ways. For
example, we may choose the units of assessment more narrowly or more broadly. We can
either search for a reflective equilibrium involving a narrowly specified theory, constituted
by a small number of principles together with very few auxiliary assumptions, or we can
search for a reflective equilibrium involving a more broadly specified theory, constituted
by a larger number of principles and further additional assumptions—​which in turn may
be interpreted as a conjunction of multiple theories, covering a wider domain of issues.
Political theorists sometimes speak of “narrow” reflective equilibrium in the first case, and
“wide” reflective equilibrium in the second (Daniels 2013). Similarly, we may take different views on which kinds of judgements—​especially whose judgements—​should serve as
input to this method; more on this shortly. Although the reflective-​equilibrium method
is consistent with the idea that we arrive at our normative or evaluative theories through
careful deliberation, we may be worried about the possible arbitrariness of its outcome,
since there may not always be a unique equilibrium. In some cases, we may not be able to
reach any equilibrium at all (the non-​existence problem), such as when we theorize about
genuine moral dilemmas and vacillate between different theories that each fit only some
of our judgements while conflicting with others. In other cases, there may exist more than
one equilibrium, in that we can arrive at different “packages” of revised theories and judge-ments that each have the required “mutual fit” (the non-​uniqueness problem). Arbitrary
factors such as framing effects or the order in which we consider different implications of
the theory may then affect which reflective equilibrium we end up with (the path-​dependence problem).
   Thought experiments and intuition pumps: Whether we opt for the strict-​evidence
method or the reflective-​equilibrium method, we may sometimes wish to sharpen or clarify our intuitions or judgements. Thought experiments and real-​world cases can serve as
useful “intuition pumps” (Dennett 2013; Brownlee and Stemplowska forthcoming). Here,
we consider some hypothetical or actual scenario that prompts strong normative or evaluative judgements. In the much-​discussed “trolley problems”, for example, we are asked to
judge what actions, if any, would be permitted to prevent a run-​away trolley from crashing
into, and killing, a larger group of people, at the expense of leading it to crash into, and kill,
a smaller group (Thomson 1985). We then use these judgements to test our relevant normative or evaluative theories, following either the strict-​evidence method or the reflective-​
equilibrium method. The usefulness of intuition pumps, especially ones involving highly
idealized, counterfactual scenarios has recently been the object of considerable controversy in political theory (Elster 2011). We return to this issue in section 6.
   The relevant judgements: Both the strict-​evidence method and the reflective-​equilibrium
method raise the question of which kinds of judgements, and whose judgements, to use in

=== p. 543 ===

testing our theories. Should we test our theories on the basis of relatively spontaneous judge-ments or on the basis of suitably “filtered” judgements, and how should that filtering take
place (Rawls 1999, 42)? And should we use the political theorist’s judgements (which might
be affected by his or her ideological views) or society’s (which might similarly be affected
by biases), and in the latter case, which society should we focus on (Miller 1992; Walzer
1983)? For example, while the Rawls of A Theory of Justice arguably followed the former
approach (relying on the political theorist’s judgements), the Rawls of Political Liberalism
subscribed to the latter (looking at society) (Rawls 1971/​1999; Rawls 1996). Specifically, the
later Rawls re-​interprets his theory of justice as an articulation of the ideas implicit in the
public culture of liberal democratic societies. The building blocks of his account of justice
are explicitly “drawn” from, and supposed to be widely acknowledged within, the society
for which that account is designed. Relatedly, political theorists disagree about whether the
judgements to which they appeal in theory testing should “fit” the particular practice the
theory is meant to regulate. If the answer to this question is positive, then the exercise of
theory construction is best seen as an attempt to offer what Ronald Dworkin calls a “constructive interpretation” of existing political practices (Dworkin 1986, chap. 2; James 2005;
Sangiovanni 2008). If the answer is negative, then the exercise of theory construction is
best understood as an attempt to “discover” particular normative and evaluative truths,
independently of existing social practices (on interpretation versus invention, see Walzer
1987). To illustrate the difference between the two approaches—​at least on one reading of
what sets them apart—​consider the following judgement, made explicitly in relation to the
practice of camping with friends: “we should institute a regime of shared ownership” (see
G. A. Cohen 2009). On a practice-​dependent/​interpretive approach, this judgement should
count as relevant evidence only in the construction of a “normative theory of camping”, not
in the construction of normative theories of other practices, such as socio-​political relations within the state. For proponents of practice-​independence, by contrast, all normative or evaluative judgements, including the one in question, have cross-​contextual validity
in the identification of what justice or other moral values demand (this point is made in
Ronzoni 2012; see also Miller 2002).17
   The applied-​moral-​philosophy method: A final method of justifying a theory in political theory is to show that it can be derived from some independently accepted moral
principles or theory. A committed utilitarian or Kantian, for example, may regard a
normative or evaluative theory as justified if and only if it can be derived from utilitarian or Kantian principles, which are treated as independently given. In this vein,
Nozick says: “Moral philosophy sets the background for, and boundaries of, political
philosophy. What persons may and may not do to one another limits what they may do
through the apparatus of the state, or do to establish such an apparatus” (Nozick 1974,
6; see also Otsuka 2003, 3). Those theorists who view political theory as a subfield of
moral philosophy will find this method appropriate. (Works in which political theory
is conducted—​at least to some extent—​a s applied moral philosophy include Singer 1972;
G. A. Cohen 2008; Fabre 2012.) By contrast, if we consider the activity of political theory

  17 The distinction between practice-​dependence and practice-​i ndependence is complex and much

debated. Due to space constraints, we are unable to explore this complexity here.

=== p. 544 ===

to take place against the background of (reasonable) pluralism about moral matters, the
applied-​moral-​philosophy method is problematic, since it relies on the acceptance of
a specific moral theory (for a critique of the “applied moral philosophy” approach, see
Williams 2005; see also Galston 2010).

6. Abstraction and Idealization in Political

In political theory, as well as in other disciplines, theories are often abstract and/​or idealized in certain respects. In this section, we explain what this means and discuss some
methodological issues raised by abstraction and idealization.

6.1 Defining Abstraction and Idealization
Broadly following Onora O’Neill (1996, chap. 2), we say that a theory is abstract with
respect to an issue—​represented by a set of statements—​if it is silent on that issue;
formally, it has no implications at all for the given statements, implying neither any
of these statements nor any of their negations. Newton’s theory of physics, for example, is abstract with respect to the colours of the physical bodies whose motion it represents. A theory is idealized with respect to an issue—​again represented by a set of
statements—​i f it entails some (simplifying or limiting) falsehood about that issue; formally, it has a false implication for some of the given statements, implying one or more
false statements among them or the negations of one or more true statements. A simple
Newtonian theory of mechanics, for instance, may be idealized with respect to friction,
entailing the absence of friction in the physical systems it represents, although friction
is present in the real world.
   Since theories are meant to simplify the world, most political theorists agree that
abstraction is virtually unavoidable in theory construction, and an innocuous intellectual
exercise (O’Neill 1996, chap. 2; see also the discussion in Stemplowska 2008). Idealization,
unlike abstraction, is looked at with greater suspicion in political theory and is considered
potentially problematic (O’Neill 1996, chap. 2).

6.2 The Worry about Idealization
The “danger of idealization” in political theory has been discussed primarily in the
debate on “ideal versus non-​ideal theory” (for an overview, see Valentini 2012). The
debate is largely animated by the worry that resort to simplifying assumptions and
idealized thought experiments or intuition pumps—​which are common in contemporary political theory—​w ill adversely affect the validity of the ensuing theories (see
e.g. O’Neill 1996, chap. 2; Farrelly 2007; Mills 2005). For instance, John Rawls develops his theory of justice assuming full compliance with the resulting principles. This

=== p. 545 ===

makes critics wonder whether we can trust Rawls’s principles to deliver correct and
action-​g uiding prescriptions for the real world, where many people fail to abide by the
demands of justice.
   In assessing this worry, two points are worth making. First, like abstraction, some
degree of idealization in our theories—​in the form of simplifying assumptions—​may play
an important, and justified, heuristic role. Again, a simple newtonian theory of physics
does not appear to be significantly undermined by its assuming friction away, especially to
the extent that information about friction can potentially be re-​introduced in refinements
or applications of the theory. This suggests that, rather than reject idealizations as problematic from the outset, we must ask whether a theory contains the “right” idealizations, given
its purpose (Robeyns 2008; Valentini 2009).
   Second, to answer the question of which idealizations are “right” and which are not,
we need to distinguish between three possible loci—​or levels—​at which idealizations can
occur: (1) the theory itself, (2) the conditions of application of the theory’s prescriptions
(where those prescriptions are of the form “if such-​and-​such conditions hold, then such-​
and-​such follows”), (3) the justification of the theory. Crucially, idealization at any one of
these levels need not entail idealization at any of the others.

6.3 Rawls’s Theory as an Example
Rawls’s theory of justice, as described earlier, consists of the “equal liberty” (X), “fair equality of opportunity” (Y), and “difference” (Z) principles and their implications. The theory
itself would be idealized—​a level (1) idealization—​if and only if these principles entailed
false statements about their subject matter—​for instance, if the statement “we ought to re-​
arrange the tax system so as to benefit the worst off as much as possible” were false. Note,
however, that the often-​criticized “idealized” assumption of full compliance is not made
within the theory itself, but occurs as part of the justification that Rawls offers for the theory. It is one of the assumptions made by the parties in the original-​position thought experiment. So, it is an idealization at level (3). Rawls’s principles, which generate his theory, do
not imply any false claims about full compliance; hence we have no idealization at level
(1) here. Nor do the prescriptions following from these principles presuppose full compliance for their applicability; hence we have no idealization at level (2) either (see Simmons
2010, 9–​10 for discussion).
   Similarly, consider Rawls’s assumption that society exists under favourable historical and social conditions. Relative to existing war-​torn, or desperately poor countries,
this assumption is clearly false: it is an idealization. Rawls says explicitly that his principles of justice may not apply to societies in which the relevant favourable conditions
are absent (Rawls 1999, 216). Does this make Rawls’s theory idealized—​a n idealization
at level (1)—​a nd problematically so? Arguably, it does not, because the favourable-​
conditions idealization operates at the level of the conditions of application of the theory’s prescriptions, that is, at level (2). The prescription that is entailed by the theory
(under a careful formulation)—​namely “if favourable conditions hold, justice demands
X, Y, and Z”—​is still true. Although the conditional nature of this prescription limits

=== p. 546 ===

the scope of application of the theory, it does not make the theory itself idealized, by
generating false prescriptions.

6.4 The Worry Reassessed
We suspect that, although worries about idealization in political theory are frequently
expressed as complaints about “theories being idealized”, they actually tend to target idealizations at levels (2) and (3), rather than (1)—​t hat is, at the levels of the theories’ conditions
of application and the justifications offered for those theories, not at the level of the theories
themselves.
   Of course, idealizations at levels (2) and (3) often make the target-​theories somewhat
irrelevant to the real world, by rendering them insufficiently action-​guiding in real-​world
circumstances. While this lack of guidance may be a genuine shortcoming, it is not accurately captured by the claim that the theories themselves are idealized. Rather, in the case
of a level (2) idealization, the theories entail true prescriptions of an “if-​t hen” sort, whose
antecedent conditions—​t he “if” clauses—​do not hold in real-​world circumstances. And in
the case of a level (3) idealization, the theories may be insufficiently justified, in that the justifications offered for them—​such as highly contrived thought experiments—​are too idealized to allow inferences for the real world.
   Our discussion highlights the importance of clarity about the role that idealizations
play in the defence and formulation of one’s theory. Consider a theory of justice prescribing “p”, defended on the assumption that there is no reasonable disagreement about
justice within society, and yet formulated in universal terms: “justice always demands
that p”. This theory does indeed run the risk of being problematically idealized, if it
turns out that the presence of reasonable disagreement makes a morally relevant difference to what justice demands. The theory, in that case, would have false implications
in a number of situations, namely those involving reasonable disagreement. A true
principle, by contrast, would only say: “if there is no reasonable disagreement, justice
demands that p”.

       7. The Significance of Disagreement in
                  Political Theory

We noted earlier that, while political theory is sometimes viewed as a subfield of moral philosophy, another view is that political theory is distinct from moral philosophy in that the
conditions of theorizing are different (see e.g. Williams 2005; Larmore 2013). On this view,
political theory, unlike—​or much more than—​moral philosophy, is conducted against the
background of (reasonable) pluralism in society. Disagreement about normative and evaluative matters, it is said, has a different status in political theory than in (mainstream) moral
philosophy. The nature of disagreement in society constrains what normative or evaluative
principles can be defended in political theory. In this section, we explore this view and discuss its methodological implications.

=== p. 547 ===

7.1 Disagreement: “Constitutive of Assertability
     Conditions” Rather Than “Epistemic”
While moral philosophers seek to answer questions such as “what ought we to do in a given
situation”, political theorists are faced with questions such as “what ought we do, given that
we do not agree about what we ought to do” (see e.g. Waldron 1999; Larmore 2013). At first
sight, we might be perplexed by this alleged difference between political theory and moral
philosophy. Are there not equally big disagreements in moral philosophy? Practically every
well-​k nown moral dilemma has the property that different people take different views on
how it should be resolved, and the question of what one should do in such cases of disagreement arises also in the moral realm.
   Yet, the difference between moral philosophy and political theory may be said to be the
following. In moral philosophy, we commonly (though not universally) make the assumption that, among the many different rival normative or evaluative theories, one is the independently correct or true theory. The task for the moral philosopher is to identify that
theory. If we conduct moral philosophy on this assumption, disagreement is of a “merely”
epistemic kind. There is a fact about what the right answer to any normative or evaluative
question is; we may just have different beliefs about that fact.
   It is less clear—​so the argument goes—​whether the same assumption can be made in
political theory. On this picture, disagreement in political theory may be viewed, not
merely as “epistemic”, reflecting different beliefs about the same truth, but as partly “constitutive” of the correctness conditions—​or warranted assertability conditions—​of normative claims themselves. On this view, whether a normative or evaluative theory in political
theory is correct (or assertable) depends, in part, on the society in which the theory is to be
applied, and specifically on the level of reasonable disagreement in that society; we define
the notion of reasonableness in section 7.3.
   A key desideratum here is that our theories be, at least in principle, acceptable to individuals holding reasonable but conflicting moral views within pluralistic societies. What
counts as a correct normative or evaluative principle in a society with little reasonable disagreement need not always count as correct in a highly pluralistic society, where the range of
reasonable disagreement is greater. In light of this, some theorists avoid using the notion of
truth in political theory altogether, and prefer to replace it with other, less loaded notions,
like reasonableness or reasonable acceptability (Rawls 1996; cf. J. Cohen 2009).
   But what might justify the shift from the “epistemic” to the “constitutive” status of disagreement in the political domain? At least two answers are possible. First, the shift might
be morally justified. On this view, a commitment to respect for persons places a burden of
“reasonable acceptability” on the principles put forward by the political theorist, insofar as
these principles may be permissibly enforced against individuals, for instance through state
action. The idea is that political theory focuses on the development of “enforceable rules”,
and these rules are normatively appropriate (meet the relevant criterion of correctness)
only if they are acceptable to reasonable individuals to whom they apply.
   Second, reasonable disagreement may be taken to constrain correctness or warranted
assertability in political theory for pragmatic reasons. After all, most of the principles put
forward by political theorists are meant to help regulate social life in complex and highly
pluralistic societies. A normative or evaluative theory that appeals only to people of a

=== p. 548 ===

particular moral persuasion would be of little use in this respect; it could not give rise to a
durable and stable social order except through autocratic imposition. And so again, acceptability to individuals with competing reasonable views may be deemed a criterion of correctness of the theory.
   The inspiration for many of the foregoing reflections can be found in John Rawls’s second major book, Political Liberalism (1993/​1996). We now offer a brief discussion of Rawls’s
treatment of the relevance of pluralism to political theorizing.

7.2 The Distinction Between “Political” and
     “Comprehensive” Theories
One of the key innovations of Political Liberalism, compared to A Theory of Justice, is
Rawls’s insistence on his theory being “political not metaphysical” (Rawls 1985). This
means two things. First, the theory does not adjudicate all aspects of interpersonal conduct
(as a “comprehensive” moral theory might do) but concerns only the “public” realm (most
notably, the basic structure of society). Second, the theory is grounded not in any “comprehensive” moral theory (“doctrine”), on which there is likely to be deep disagreement in
any pluralistic liberal society, but in ideals that are drawn from the public culture of such a
society. Thus a “political” theory is typically (i) restricted to a smaller domain of issues and
(ii) less morally and metaphysically “loaded” (thereby “thinner”) than a “comprehensive”
theory. In particular, it refrains from taking a stand on issues that are too controversial.
    For example, a theory of justice that adjudicates all aspects of personal, and not just
political and social, life would be “comprehensive”, as would be a theory based on the metaphysically loaded premise that human beings are morally equal because they are created
“in the image of God”. Both theories would be the object of reasonable disagreement within
a pluralistic society. By contrast, a theory of justice that focuses on the basic structure of
society and is based on a commitment to “citizens’ freedom and equality” would count as
“political”, since its domain does not “over-​reach” and its premises are entrenched in the
public culture of liberal democracies and arguably shared by individuals holding competing yet reasonable comprehensive doctrines. But what does the notion of “reasonableness”
stand for?

7.3 The Notion of “Reasonable Disagreement”
The notion of “reasonableness” is hard to pin down in general, and this is true in Rawls’s
case as well (for discussion, see Gaus 1996, 131–​132; Gaus 1999). In particular, the notion may
be interpreted in epistemological and/​or moral ways. Under an epistemological interpretation, something is reasonable if it is consistent with a proper use of reason in light of the evidence available. Rawls believes that, because of what he calls the “burdens of judgment”, we
should not expect agreement between the views of different people, even when these views
are all developed by consistently applying the powers of reason (Rawls 1996, Lecture 2, sec.
2). Under a moral interpretation, reasonableness refers to a view’s compatibility with certain
fundamental normative requirements, such as respect for citizens as free and equal, or a

=== p. 549 ===

commitment to mutual justification (Rawls 1996, Lecture 2, sec. 3). This would make views
that reject such a commitment unreasonable.
   Both interpretations of “reasonableness” have virtues and vices, especially in the context
of what we earlier called the “moral” justification for deeming acceptability in the context
of reasonable disagreement an assertability condition for theories within political theory.
As far as the epistemological interpretation of reasonableness is concerned, on the positive
side, it offers a compelling rationale for treating only some contested views as “worthy of
respect”, namely those with a given epistemic pedigree. On the negative side, this interpretation potentially allows morally repugnant views to count as reasonable, assuming they
involve no breach of reason, purely epistemically understood. If a necessary condition for
the overall acceptability of a normative or evaluative theory is that it is acceptable to all
individuals with reasonable views, an acceptable theory must then potentially appeal even
to individuals with morally repugnant views, and this may be too much to ask.
   As far as the moral interpretation of reasonableness is concerned, on the positive side, it
allows us to “filter out” morally repugnant views. But, on the negative side, it does so at the
cost of referring to substantive values that themselves require justification. The suspicion is
that, on a moralized interpretation, the “reasonable” simply corresponds to the moral commitments that the liberal theorist considers non-​negotiable: it is ad hoc (see Mouffe 2005).
Again, we do not take a stand on this, but note that these difficulties threaten the plausibility of defining the overall acceptability of a normative or evaluative theory simply in terms
of its acceptability to all individuals with reasonable views; identifying those reasonable
views may itself rely on moral premises.

7.4 The Quest for an “Overlapping Consensus”
Finally, turning to the “pragmatic” justification for taking disagreement to have a “constitutive” rather than purely “epistemic” status in political theory, we conclude with some
remarks on Rawls’s notion of an “overlapping consensus”. An overlapping consensus on
a normative or evaluative theory in a social or political domain occurs when this theory
is endorsed from the perspective of different reasonable comprehensive doctrines held
in society. A normative theory that cannot be endorsed from different such perspectives
could not hope to gain sufficient support and to offer a stable basis for social organization in
pluralistic liberal democracies (Rawls 1996, Lecture 4). The notion of an overlapping consensus operationalizes the idea that the criterion of correctness of a “political” theory is
its acceptability to individuals who hold competing but reasonable comprehensive moral
theories.

                       8. Concluding Remarks

We have reviewed the methodology of analytic political theory from what we hope is a
somewhat novel and helpful angle. By drawing on ideas from the philosophy of science,
we have attempted to highlight the ways in which theorizing in political theory relates to

=== p. 550 ===

theorizing in other areas of philosophy and positive science. We have also reviewed some
recent debates and controversies within the political-​theory literature, which has only
recently given greater attention to methodological questions. Our hope is that this article
will prove to be a clarifying contribution to the growing methodological debate in political
theory.

References
Arrow, Kenneth Joseph. 1951. Social Choice and Individual Values. New York: John Wiley
  & Sons.
Baehr, Amy R. 2013. “Liberal Feminism.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, edited
  by Edward N. Zalta, Winter 2013. <http://​plato.stanford.edu/​archives/​w in2013/​entries/​
  feminism-​liberal/​>. Accessed September 24, 2015.
Baker, Alan. 2013. “Simplicity.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, edited by Edward
  N. Zalta, Fall 2013. <http://​plato.stanford.edu/​archives/​fall2013/​entries/​simplicity/​>.
  Accessed September 24, 2015.
Blackorby, Charles, Walter Bossert, and David J. Donaldson. 2005. Population Issues in Social
  Choice Theory, Welfare Economics, and Ethics. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Bratman, Michael. 1999. Faces of Intention: Selected Essays on Intention and Agency.
Brownlee, Kimberley, and Zofia Stemplowska. Forthcoming. “Trapped in an Experience
  Machine with a Famous Violinist: Thought Experiments in Normative Theory.” In
  Research Methods in Analytical Political Theory, edited by Adrian Blau. Cambridge:
  Cambridge University Press.
Carter, Ian. 2012. “Positive and Negative Liberty.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
  edited by Edward N. Zalta, Spring 2012. <http://​plato.stanford.edu/​archives/​spr2012/​
  entries/​liberty-​positive-​negative/​>. Accessed September 24, 2015.
Chakravartty, Anjan. 2013. “Scientific Realism.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
  edited by Edward N. Zalta, Summer 2013. <http://​plato.stanford.edu/​archives/​sum2013/​
  entries/​scientific-​realism/​>. Accessed September 24, 2015.
Christiano, Thomas. 2008. “Democracy.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, edited
  by Edward N. Zalta, Fall 2008. <http://​plato.stanford.edu/​archives/​fall2008/​entries/​
  democracy/​>. Accessed September 24, 2015.
Cohen, G. A. 1988. History, Labour, and Freedom: Themes from Marx. Oxford: Clarendon
Cohen, G. A. 1995. Self-​Ownership, Freedom, and Equality. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Cohen, G. A. 2008. Rescuing Justice and Equality. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Cohen, G. A. 2009. Why Not Socialism? Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Cohen, Joshua. 2009. “Truth and Public Reason.” Philosophy & Public Affairs 37 (1): 2–​42.
Daniels, Norman. 2013. “Reflective Equilibrium.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
  edited by Edward N. Zalta, Winter 2013. <http://​plato.stanford.edu/​archives/​w in2013/​
  entries/​reflective-​equilibrium/​>. Accessed September 24, 2015.
Dennett, Daniel C. 2013. Intuition Pumps And Other Tools for Thinking. New York: W.
  W. Norton.

=== p. 551 ===

Dworkin, Ronald. 1975. “The Original Position.” In Reading Rawls: Critical Studies on
  Rawls’s A Theory of Justice, edited by Norman Daniels, 16–​52. Stanford, CA: Stanford
Dworkin, Ronald. 1986. Law’s Empire. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Elster, Jakob. 2011. “How Outlandish Can Imaginary Cases Be?” Journal of Applied Philosophy
Fabre, Cécile. 2012. Cosmopolitan War. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Farrelly, Colin. 2007. “Justice in Ideal Theory: A Refutation.” Political Studies 55 (4): 844–​64.
Gallie, W. B. 1955. “Essentially Contested Concepts.” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 56
Galston, William A. 2010. “Realism in Political Theory.” European Journal of Political Theory
Gärdenfors, Peter. 2000. Conceptual Spaces: The Geometry of Thought. Cambridge,
  MA: MIT Press.
Gaus, Gerald F. 1996. Justificatory Liberalism : An Essay on Epistemology and Political Theory.
Gaus, Gerald F. 1999. “Reasonable Pluralism and the Domain of the Political: How the
  Weaknesses of John Rawls’s Political Liberalism Can Be Overcome by a Justificatory
  Liberalism.” Inquiry 42 (2): 259–​84.
Gerring, John. 1999. “What Makes a Concept Good? A Criterian Framework for
  Understanding Concept Formation in the Social Sciences.” Polity 31 (3): 357–​93.
Gilabert, Pablo, and Holly Lawford-​       Smith. 2012. “Political Feasibility: A Conceptual
  Exploration.” Political Studies 60 (4): 809–​25.
Gilbert, Margaret. 1989. On Social Facts. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Goodin, Robert E. 2009. The Oxford Handbook of Political Science. Oxford: Oxford
Harsanyi, John C. 1955. “Cardinal Welfare, Individualistic Ethics, and Interpersonal
  Comparisons of Utility.” Journal of Political Economy 63 (4): 309–​21.
James, Aaron. 2005. “Constructing Justice for Existing Practice: Rawls and the Status Quo.”
  Philosophy & Public Affairs 33 (3): 281–​316.
Joyce, Richard. 2009. “Moral Anti-​Realism.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
  edited by Edward N. Zalta, Summer 2009. <http://​plato.stanford.edu/​archives/​sum2009/​
  entries/​moral-​anti-​realism/​>. Accessed September 24, 2015.
Larmore, Charles. 2013. “What Is Political Philosophy?” Journal of Moral Philosophy 10
Leopold, David, and Marc Stears. 2008. Political Theory: Methods and Approaches. Oxford:
  Oxford University Press.
Linz, Juan J., and Alfred Stepan. 1996. Problems of Democratic Transition and
  Consolidation: Southern Europe, South America, and Post-​Communist Europe. Baltimore:
  Johns Hopkins University Press.
List, Christian. 2011. “The Logical Space of Democracy.” Philosophy & Public Affairs 39
List, Christian. 2013. “Social Choice Theory.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
  edited by Edward N. Zalta, Winter 2013. <http://​plato.stanford.edu/​archives/​w in2013/​
  entries/​social-​choice/​>. Accessed September, 24, 2015.
List, Christian, and Philip Pettit. 2011. Group Agency: The Possibility, Design, and Status of
  Corporate Agents. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

=== p. 552 ===

Lovett, Frank. 2013. “Republicanism.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, edited by
  Edward N. Zalta, Spring 2013. <http://​plato.stanford.edu/​archives/​spr2013/​entries/​republicanism/​>. Accessed September, 24, 2015.
MacCallum, Gerald C. 1967. “Negative and Positive Freedom.” The Philosophical Review 76
McDermott, Daniel. 2008. “Analytic Political Philosophy.” In Political Theory: Methods
  and Approaches, edited by David Leopold and Marc Stears, 11–​28. Oxford: Oxford
Margolis, Eric, and Stephen Laurence. 2012. “Concepts.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of
  Philosophy, edited by Edward N. Zalta, Fall 2012. <http://​plato.stanford.edu/​archives/​
  fall2012/​entries/​concepts/​>. Accessed September, 24, 2015.
Miller, David. 1992. “Distributive Justice: What the People Think.” Ethics 102 (3): 555–​93.
Miller, David. 2002. “Two Ways to Think About Justice.” Politics, Philosophy & Economics 1
Mills, Charles W. 2005. “‘Ideal Theory’ as Ideology.” Hypatia 20 (3): 165–​83.
Mouffe, Chantal. 2005. “The Limits of John Rawls’s Pluralism.” Politics, Philosophy &
  Economics 4 (2): 221–​31.
Nozick, Robert. 1974. Anarchy, State, and Utopia. New York: Basic Books.
O’Neill, Onora. 1996. Towards Justice and Virtue: A Constructive Account of Practical
  Reasoning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Okasha, Samir. 2002. Philosophy of Science: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford
Oppenheim, Felix E. 1981. Political Concepts: A Reconstruction. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Otsuka, Michael. 2003. Libertarianism Without Inequality. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Parfit, Derek. 1984. Reasons and Persons. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Pettit, Philip. 1993. The Common Mind: An Essay on Psychology, Society, and Politics.
Pettit, Philip. 1997. Republicanism. A Theory of Freedom and Government. Oxford: Clarendon
Pettit, Philip. 2011. “The Instability of Freedom as Noninterference: The Case of Isaiah
  Berlin.” Ethics 121 (4): 693–​716.
Quine, W. V. 1975. “On Empirically Equivalent Systems of the World.” Erkenntnis 9 (3): 313–​28.
Rawls, John. 1985. “Justice as Fairness: Political Not Metaphysical.” Philosophy and Public
  Affairs 14 (3): 223–​51.
Rawls, John. 1996. Political Liberalism. New York: Columbia University Press.
Rawls, John. 1999. A Theory of Justice. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Robeyns, Ingrid. 2008. “Ideal Theory in Theory and Practice.” Social Theory and Practice 34
Roemer, John E. 1998. Equality of Opportunity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Ronzoni, Miriam. 2012. “Life Is Not a Camping Trip—​on the Desirability of Cohenite
  Socialism.” Politics, Philosophy & Economics 11 (2): 171–​85.
Sangiovanni, Andrea. 2008. “Justice and the Priority of Politics to Morality.” Journal of
  Political Philosophy 16 (2): 137–​64.
Sayre-​McCord, Geoff. 2011. “Moral Realism.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
  edited by Edward N. Zalta, Summer 2011. <http://​plato.stanford.edu/​archives/​sum2011/​
  entries/​moral-​realism/​>. Accessed 24 September, 2015.
Searle, John R. 1995. The Construction of Social Reality. New York: Free Press.

=== p. 553 ===

Sen, Amartya K. 1970. Collective Choice and Social Welfare. San Francisco: Holden-​Day.
Sen, Amartya K. 1980. “Equality of What?” In The Tanner Lectures on Human Values, Volume
   I, edited by Sterling M. McMurrin, 195–​220. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sen, Amartya K. 1987. The Standard of Living. Edited by Geoffrey Hawthorn.
Simmons, A. John. 2010. “Ideal and Nonideal Theory.” Philosophy & Public Affairs 38 (1): 5–​36.
Singer, Peter. 1972. “Famine, Affluence, and Morality.” Philosophy & Public Affairs 1 (3):
   229–​43.
Southwood, Nicholas. 2013. “Democracy as a Modally Demanding Value.” Noûs Online
   early: n/​a–​n/​a.
Stemplowska, Zofia. 2008. “What’s Ideal About Ideal Theory?” Social Theory and Practice 34
Thomson, Judith Jarvis. 1985. “The Trolley Problem.” The Yale Law Journal 94 (6): 1395–​415.
Tollefsen, Deborah Perron. 2002. “Collective Intentionality and the Social Sciences.”
   Philosophy of the Social Sciences 32 (1): 25–​50.
Tuomela, Raimo. 2007. The Philosophy of Sociality: The Shared Point of View.
Valentini, Laura. 2009. “On the Apparent Paradox of Ideal Theory.” Journal of Political
   Philosophy 17 (3): 332–​55.
Valentini, Laura. 2012. “Ideal vs. Non-​Ideal Theory: A Conceptual Map.” Philosophy Compass
Van Fraassen, Bas C. 1980. The Scientific Image. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Waldron, Jeremy. 1999. Law and Disagreement. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Walzer, Michael. 1983. Spheres of Justice: A Defense of Pluralism and Equality.
   New York: Basic Books.
Walzer, Michael. 1987. Interpretation and Social Criticism. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
Williams, Bernard Arthur Owen. 2005. In the Beginning Was the Deed: Realism and Moralism
   in Political Argument. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

