=== chunk: wittgenstein-1953-philosophical-investigations/pi-2-xi-aspect-seeing ===
title: Part II §xi — aspect-seeing and seeing-as
source_pdf: docs/sources/wittgenstein-1953-philosophical-investigations/full.ocr.pdf
pdf_pages: 200-236
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 193
plan_page_end: 229
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 193 ===

                                     xl

   Two uses of the word "see".
   The one: "What do you see there?"—"I see this” (and then a description, a drawing, a copy). The other: "I see a likeness between these
two faces"—let the man I tell this to be seeing the faces as clearly as I
do myself.
  The importance of this is the difference of category between the two
'objects' of sight.

   The one man might make an accurate drawing of the two faces,
and the other notice in the drawing the likeness which the former did
not sce.

  I contemplate a face, and then suddenly notice its likeness to another. I see that it has not changed; and vet I see it differently. I call
this experience "noticing an aspect".

  Its causes are of interest to psychologists.

  We are interested in the concept and its place among the concepts of
experience.

  You could imagine the illustration

appearing in several places in a book, a text-book for instance.    In the
relevant text something different is in question every time: here a glass
cube, there an inverted open box, there a wire frame of that shape,
there three boards forming a solid angle.    Each time the text supplies
the interpretation of the illustration.
 But we can also see the illustration now as one thing now as another.
—So we interpret it, and see it as we inferpref it.

  Here perhaps we should like to reply: The description of what is
got immediately, i.e. of the visual experience, by means of an interpretation—is an indirect description.     "I see the   figure as   a box"
means: | have a particular visual experience which I have found that
I always have when I interpret the figure as a box or when I look at
                                   Ig:e

=== p. 194 ===

a box.      But ıf it meant this I ought to know it.         I ought to be
able to refer to the experience directly, and not only indirectly.     (As
I can speak of red without calling it the colour of blood.)

  I shall call the following figure, derived from Jastrow', the duck-rabbit. It can be seen as a rabbit's head or as a duck's.

And I must distinguish between the 'continuous seeing' of an aspect
and the 'dawning' of an aspect.
  The picture might have been shewn me, and I never have seen
anything but a rabbit in it.

      Here it ıs useful to introduce the idea of a picture-object.      For
 instance

 would be a 'picture-face'.
      In some respects I stand towards it as I do towards a human face.
 I can study its expression, can react to it as to the expression of the
 human face. A child can talk to picture-men or picture-animals, can
 treat them as it treats dolls.

      I may, then, have seen the duck-rabbit simply as a picture-rabbit
 from the first. That is to say, ıf asked "What's that?" or "What do
 you see here?" I should have replied: "A picture-rabbit".          If I had
 further been asked what that was, I should have explained by pointing
 to all sorts of pictures of rabbits, should perhaps have pointed to real
 rabbits, talked about their habits, or given an imitation of them.

      1 should not have answered the question "What do you see here?"
 by saying: "Now I am seeing it as a picture-rabbit”".       I should simply

                           ! Fact and Fabli in Psyebologj.

=== p. 195 ===

have described my perception: just as ıf I had said "I see a red circle
over there."—
  Nevertheless someone else could have said of me: "He is seeing the
figure as a picture-rabbit."”

  It would have made as little sense for me to say "Now I am seeing
it as ..." as to say at the sight of a knife and fork "Now I am seeing
this as a knife and fork".      This expression would not be understood
                                                                      —
Any more than: "Now it's a fork" or "It can be a fork too".

  One doesn't fake’ what one knows as the cutlery at a meal for
cutlery; any more than one ordinarily tries to move one's mouth as
one eats, or aims at moving it.

  If you say "Now it's a face for me", we can ask: "What change are
you alluding to?"

  I see two pictures, with the duck-rabbit surrounded by rabbits in
one, by ducks in the other. I do not notice that they are the same.
Does itfollow from this thatI see something different in the two cases?—
It gives us a reason for using this expression here.

  "l   saw it quite   differently, I   should never have      recognized it!"
Now, that is an exclamation. And there is also a justification for it.

  I should never have thought of superimposing the heads like that,
of making this comparison between them. For they suggest a different
mode of comparison.
  Nor has the head seen like this the slightest similarity to the head
seen like this——although they are congruent.

  I am shewn a picture-rabbit and asked what it is; I say "It's a rabbit".
Not "Now it's a rabbit”.     I am reporting my perception.—I am shewn
the duck-rabbit and asked what it is;      I may say "It's a duck-rabbit".
But I may also react to the question quite differently—The answer
that it is a duck-rabbit is again the report of a perception; the answer
"Now it's a rabbit" is not. Had
                              I replied "It's a rabbit", the ambiguity
would have escaped me, and I should have been reporting my perception.

  The change of aspect.      "But surely you would say that the picture
is altogether different now!"
  But what is different: my impression?       my point of view?—Can I
say?   I describe the alteration like a perception; quite as ıf the object
had altered before my eyes.

=== p. 196 ===

   "NowI am seeing fhis”, I might say (pointing to another picture, for
example).   This has the form of a report of a new perception.
   The expression of a change of aspect is the expression of a new
perception and at the same time of the perception's being unchanged.

   I suddenly see the solution of a puzzle-picture.   Before, there were
branches there; now there is    a human shape.   My visual impression
has changed and now I recognize that it has not only shape and colour
but also a quite particular 'organization'—My visual impression has
changed;—what was it like before and what is it like now?—If I
represent it by means of an exact copy—and isn't that a good representation of it?—no change ıs shewn.

   And above all do not say "After all my visual impression isn't the
drawing; 1t 18 this    which I can't shew to anyone."—Of course it 1s
not the drawing, but neither is it anything of the same category,
which I carry within myself,

   The concept of the 'inner picture' is misleading, for this concept
uses the ‘outer picture' as a model; and vet the uses of the words for
these concepts are no more like one another than the uses of 'numeral’
and ‘number'. (And ıf one chose to call numbers 'ideal numerals', one
might produce a similar confusion.)

   If you put the 'organization' of a visual impression on a level with
colours and shapes, you are proceeding from the idea of the visual
impression as an inner object. Of course this makes this object into a
chimera; a queerly shifting construction. For the similarity to a picture
is now impaired.

   If T know that the schematic cube has various aspects and I want to
find out what someone else sees, I can get him to make a model of
what he sees, in addition to a copy, or to point to such a model; even
though he has no idea of my purpose in demanding two accounts.
   But when we have a changing aspect the case is altered. Now the
only possible expression of our experience is what before perhaps
seemed, or even was, a useless specification when once we had the
copy.

   And this by itself wrecks the comparison of 'organization' with
colour and shape ın visual impressions.

   If I saw the duck-rabbit as a rabbit, then I saw: these shapes and
colours (I give them in detail)—and I saw besides something like this:

=== p. 197 ===

and here I point to a number of different pictures of rabbits.—This
shews the difference between the concepts.
  ‘Seeing as . . . .' is not part of perception.   And for that reason it is
like seeing and again not like.

  I look at an animal and am asked: "What do vou see?"            I answer:
"A rabbit" —I see a landscape; suddenly a rabbit runs past.       I exclaim
"A rabbit!"
  Both things, both the report and the exclamation, are expressions of
perception and of visual experience. But the exclamation is so ın a
different sense from the repoit: it is forced from us.—It is related to the
experience as a cry is to pain.

  But since it is the description of a perception, it can also be called the
expression of thought.—-—If you are looking at the object, you need
not think ofit; but if you are having the visual experience expressed by
the exclamation, vou are also thinking of what you see.

  Hence the flashing of an aspect on us seems half visual experience,
half thought.

    Someone suddenly sees an appearance which he does not recognize
(it may be a familiar object, but in an unusual position or lighting); the
lack of recognition perhaps lasts only a few seconds. Is 1t correct to say
he has a different visual experience from someone who knew the
object at once?

  For might not someone be able to describe an unfamiliar shape
that appeared before him just as accurately as 1, to whom it is familiar?
And isn't that the answer?—Of course it will not generally be so.
And his description will run quite differently. (I say, for example,
"The animal had long ears"-—he: "There were two long appendages”,
and then he draws them.)

  I meet someone whom I have not seen for years; I see him clearly,
but fail to know him. Suddenly I know him, I see the old face in the
altered one. I believe that I should do a different portrait of him now
if I could paint.

  Now, when I know my acquaintance in a crow'd, perhaps after
looking in his direction for quite a while,—is this a special sort of
seeing? Is it a case of both seeing and thinking? or an amalgam of the
two, as I should almost like to say?
  The question is: why does one want to say this?

=== p. 198 ===

198«             PHILOSOPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS Ilxi

   The very expression which is also a report of what is seen, is here
a cry of recognition.

  What is the      criterion of the visual experience?—The criterion?
What do you suppose?
 The representation of 'what is seen'.

   The concept of a representation of what is seen, like that of a copy,
is very elastic, and so fogether with it ıs the concept of what is seen.
The two are intimately connected.       (Which ıs nof to say that they are
alike.)

   How does one tell that human beings see three-dimensionally?—
I ask someone about the lie of the land (over there) of which he has a
view.     "Is it like A&J?" (I shew him with my hand)—"Yes."—"How
do you know?"—"It's not misty, I see it quite clear."—He does not
give reasons for the surmise.     The only thing that is natural to us
is to represent what we see three-dimensionally; special practice and
training are needed for two-dimensional representation whether in
drawing or ın words.     (The queerness of children's drawings.)

   If someone sees a smile and does not know it for a smile, does not
understand it as such, does he see it differently from someone who
understands 1t?—He mimics it differently, for instance.

   Hold the drawing of a face upside down and you can't recognize
the expression of the face.   Perhaps you can see that it is smiling, but
not exactly what kind of smile it is.    You cannot imitate the smile or
describe it more exactly.
  And yet the picture which you have turned round may be a most
exact representation of a person's face.

  The figure (a)              is the reverse of the figure (b)

As (c)       m&\@}            is the reverse of (d)     ‘_(/D‚ägm

But — I should like to say — there is a different difference between my
impressions of (c) and (d) and between those of (a) and (b).          (d),
for example, looks neater than (c).        (Compare a remark of Lewis
Carroirs.)   (d) is easy, (c) hard to copy.

=== p. 199 ===

                  PHILOSOPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS Iki                      Isse

  Imagine the duck-rabbit hidden in a tangle oflines. Now I suddenly
notice it in the picture, and notice it simply as the head of a rabbit.
At some later time I look at the same picture and notice the same
figure, but see it as the duck, without necessarily realizing that 1t was
the same figure both times.—IfT later see the aspect change—can I say
that the duck and rabbit aspects are now seen quite differently from
when I recognized them separately ın the tangle of lines? No.
  But the    change produces a surprise not produced by the recognition.

  If you search ın a figure (1) for another figure (2), and then find it,
you see (1) ın anew way. Not only can you give a new kind of description of it, but noticing the second figure was a new visual experience.

  But you would not necessarily want to say "Figure (1) looks quite
different now; it isn't even iın the least like the figure I saw before,
though they are congruent!"

  There are here hugely many interrelated phenomena and possible
concepts.

  Then is the copy ofthe figure an incomplete description of my visual
experience? No.—But the circumstances decide whether, and what,
more detailed specifications are necessary.—It may be an incomplete
description; if there is still something to ask.

  Of course we can say: There are certain things which fall equally
under the concept     'picture-rabbit' and under the     concept 'picturcduck'. And a picture, a drawing, is such a thing.—But the impression
is not simultancously of a picture-duck and a picture-rabbit.

  "What I really see must surely be what is produced in me by the
influence of the object"—Then what is produced in me is a sort of
copy, something that in its turn can be looked at, can be before
one; almost something like a materialisation.
  And this materialization is something spatial and 1t must be possible
to describe it in purely spatial terms.      For instance (if it ıs a face)
it can smile; the concept of friendliness, however, has no place in an
account of it, but is foreign to such an account (even though it may
subserve it).

  If you ask me what I saw, perhaps I shall be able to make a sketch
which shews you; but I shall mostly have no recollection of the way
my glance shifted in looking at it.

=== p. 200 ===

200*               PHILOSOPHICAL   INVESTIGATIONS    Hxi

  The concept of 'seeing' makes a tangled impression.          Well, it is
tangled.—I look at the landscape, my gaze ranges over it, I see
all sorts of distinct and indistinct movement; this impresses itself
sharply on me, that ıs quite hazy.    After all, how completely ragged
what we see can appear1 And now look at all that can be meant by
"description of what is seen" —But this just is what is called description of what is seen.    There is not one genuine proper case of such
description—the     rest being just   vague,   something which awaits
clarification, or which must just be swept aside as rubbish.

  Here we are in enormous danger of wanting to make fine distinctions.—It is the same when one tries to define the concept of a material
object in terms of 'what ıs really seen' —What we have rather to do is
to accept the everyday language-game, and to note false accounts of
the matter as false.   The primitive language-game which children are
taught needs no justification; attempts at justification need to be
rejected.

  Take as an example the aspects of a triangle.    This triangle

can be seen as a triangular hole, as a solid, as a geometrical drawing;
as standing on its base, as hanging from its apex; as a mountain,
as a wedge, as an arrow or pointer, as an overturned object whichis
meant to stand on the shorter side of the right angle, as a half parallelogram, and as various other things.

   "You can think now of this now of this as you look at it, can regard
it now as this now as this, and then you will see it now this way, now
  fj-." — What way? There is no further qualification.

  Buthow is it possible to see an object according to an interpretation? —
The question represents it as a queer fact; as ıf something were being
forced into a form it did not really fit. But no squeezing, no forcing
took place here.

  When it looks as if there were no room for such a form between
other ones you have to look for it ın another dimension.       If there is
no room here, there is room in another dimension.

=== p. 201 ===

  (Itis in this sense too that thereis no room fori1mag1nary numbers
in the continuum of real numbers.      But what this means is: the application of the concept ofimaginary numbers is less like that of real
numbers than appears from the look of'the calculations.      1t is necessary
to get down to the application, and then the concept finds a different
place, one which, so to speak, one never dreamed of.)

  How would the following account do: "What I can see something
as, ıs what it can be a picture of"?
  What this means is: the aspects in a change of aspects are those
ones which the figure might sometimes have permanently in a picture.

  A triangle can really be standing up in one picture, be hanging in
another, and can in a third be something that has fallen over.—That is,
I who am looking at 1t say, not "It may also be something that has
fallen over", but "That glass has fallen over and is lying there in
fragments". This is how we react to the picture.

  Could I say what a picture must be like to produce this effect?
No.   There are, for example, styles of painting which do not convey
anything to me in this immediate way, but do to other people.             I
think custom and upbringing have a hand in this.

   What does it mean to say that I ‘see the sphere floatingin the air' ın a
picture?
  Is it enough that this description is the first to hand, is the matterof-course one? No, for it might be so for various reasons. This might,
for instance, simply be the conventional description.
  What is the expression of my not merely understanding the picture ın
this way, for instance, (knowing what it is supposed to be), but seeing
it ıin this way?—It is expressed by: "The sphere seems to float", "You
see it floating", or again, in a special tone of voice, "It floats!"
  This, then, is the expression of taking something for something.
But not being used as such.

  Here we are not asking ourselves what are the causes and what
produces this impression in a particular case.

  And is it a special impression?—"Surely I see something different
when I see the sphere floating from when I merely see it lying there."—
This really means: This expression is justified!—(For taken literally
it is no more than a repetition.)

=== p. 202 ===

202>               PHILOSOPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS Ilxi

   (And yet my impression is not that of a real floating sphere either.
There are various forms of 'three-dimensional seeing'.             The three-dimensional     character   of a photograph   and   the    three-di       ional
character of what we see through a stereoscope.)

   "And is it really a different impression?"—In order to answer this
I should like to ask myself whether there is really something different
there in me.     But how can I find out?——I describe what I am seeing
differently .

   Certain drawings are always seen as flat figures, and others sometimes, or always, three-dimensionally.
    Here one would now like to say: the visual impression of what is
 seen three-dimensionally is three-dimensional; with the schematic cube,
 for instance, it is a cube.    (For the description of the impression is
 the description of a cube.)

       And then it seems queer that with some drawings our impression
 should be a flat thing, and with some a three-dimensional thing.          One
 asks oneself "Where is this going to end?"

       WhenI see the picture of a galloping horse—do I merely know that
 this is the kind of movement meant?       Is it superstition to think I see
 the horse galloping in the picture?——And does my visual impression
 gallop too?

       What does   anyone tell me by    saying   "Now I      see   it as ....."?
 What consequences has this information? What can I do with it?

       People often associate colours with vowels.        Someone might find
  that a vowel changed its colour when it was repeated over and over
  again.    He finds @ 'now blue—mnow red', for instance.
       The expression "Now I am seeing it as . . ." might have no more
  significance for us than: "Now I find a red".
     (Linked with physiological observations, even this change might
  acquire importance for us.)

       Here it occurs to me that in conversation on acsthetic matters we
  use the words: "You have to see it like /his, this is how it is meant";
  "When you see it like this, you see where it goes wrong"; "You have
  to hear this bar as an introduction"; "You must hear it in this key";
  "You must phrase it like Ahis” (which can refer to hearing as well as to
  playing).

=== p. 203 ===

  This              figure                a

is supposed to represent a convex step and to be used in some kind
of topological demonstration.      For this purpose we draw the straight
line a through the geometric centres of the two surfaces.—Now ıf
anyone's three-dimensional impression of the figure were never more
than momentary, and even so were now concave, now convex, that
might make it difficult for him to follow our demonstration.          And
if he finds that the flat aspect alternates with a three-dimensional one,
that is just as if I were to shew him completely different objects in
the course of the demonstration.

  What does it mean for me to look at a drawing in descriptive
geometry and say:     "I know that this line appears again here, but I
can't see it like that"?   Does it simply mean a lack of familiarity in
operating with the drawing; that I don't 'know my way about' too
well?—This familiarity is certainly one of our criteria.        What tells
us that someone is seeing the drawing three-dimensionally is a certain
kind of 'knowing one's way about'.         Certain gestures, for instance,
which indicate the three-dimensional relations: fine shades ofbehaviour.
  I see that an animal in a picture is transfixed by an arrow. It has
struck it in the throat and sticks out at the back of the neck.    Let the
picture be a silhouette.—Do you see the arrow—or do you merely know
that these two bits are supposed to represent part of an arrow?
  (Compare Kohler's figure of the interpenctrating hexagons.)

  "But this isn't seeing/’       "But this is seeing ["—It must be possible
                             f

to give both remarks a conceptual justification.

  But this is seeing! /n what sense is it seeing?

  "The phenomenon is at first surprising, but a physiological explanation of it will certainly be found."—
  Our problem is not a causal but a conceptual one.

  If the picture of the transfixed beast or of the interpenctrating
hexagons were shewn to me just for            a moment and then I had to
describe it, that would be my description; if I had to draw it I should

=== p. 204 ===

certainly produce a very faulty copy, but it would shew some sort of
animal transfixed by an arrow, or two hexagons interpenetrating.             That
is to say: there are certain mistakes that I should not make.

      The first thing to jump to my eye in this picture is: there are two
hexagons.
  Now I look at them and ask myself: "Do I really see them as hexagons?"—and for the whole time they are before my eyes?                (Assuming
that they have not changed their aspect ın that time.)—And I should
like to reply: "I am not thinking of them as hexagons the whole time."

      Someone tells me: "I saw it at once as two hexagons.            And that's
the whole of what1 saw."          But how do I understand this?        I think he
would have given this description at once in answer to the question
"What are you seeing?”, nor would he have treated it as one among
several possibilities.     In this his description ıs like the answer "A face"
on being shewn the figure

      The best description I can give of what was shewn me for a moment
 1s     this: ..... .                    .     ,
       "The impression was that of a rearing anımal.”             So a perfectly
 definite description came out.—Was it seeing, or was it a thought?

      Do not try to analyse your own inner experience.
       Of course I might also have seen the picture first as something
 different,     and then have said to myself "Oh,           it's two hexagons!"
 So the aspect would have altered.          And does this prove that I in fact
 saw it as something definite?
       "Is it a genuine visual experience?"     The question is: in what sense
 is it one?
       Here it is difficult to see that what is at issue is the fixing of concepts.
       A concept forces itself on one.   {This ıs what you must not forget.)

       For when should I call it      a mere case of knowing, not seeing?—
 Perhaps when someone treats the picture as a working drawing,
 reads it like a blueprint.       (Fine shades of behaviour—Why are they
 important*       They have important consequences.)

=== p. 205 ===

  "To me it is an animal pierced by an arrow."       That is what I treat
it as; this ıs my attitude to the figure. This is one meaning in calling it
a case of 'seeing'.

  But can I say in the same sense: "To me these are two hexagons"?
Not in the same sense, but ın a similar one.

  You need to think of the role which pictures such as paintings (as
opposed to working drawings) have in our lives.        This role is by no
means a uniform one.
  A comparison: texts are sometimes hung on the wall.             But not
theorems of mechanics.    (Our relation to these two things.)

  If you see the drawing as such-and-such an animal, whatI expect
from you will be pretty different from what I expect when you merely
know what it is meant to be.

  Perhaps the following expression would have been better: we
regard the photograph, the picture on our wall, as the object itself
(the man, landscape, and so on) depicted there.

  This need not have been so. We could easily imagine people who
did not have this relation to such pictures. Who, for example, would
be repelled by photographs, because a face without colour and even
perhaps a face reduced in scale struck them as inhuman.

  I say: "We regard a portrait as a human being,"—but when do we do
so, and for how long? Always, if we see it at all (and do not, say, see it
as something else)?
  I might say yes to this, and that would determine the concept of
regarding-as.—The question ıs whether yet another concept, related
to this one, is also of importance to us: that, namely, of a seeing-as
which only takes place while I am actually concerning myself with the
picture as the object depicted.

  I might say: a picture does not always /ive for me while I am seeing it.
  "Her picture smiles down on me from the wall." It need not always
do so, whenever my glance lights on it.

  The duck-rabbit.    One asks oneself:    how can the eye—this dor—
be looking in a direction?—"See, if'is looking” (And one 'looks' oneself as one says this.) But one does not say and do this the whole time
one is looking at the picture. And now, what is this "See, it's looking!"
—does it express a sensation?

=== p. 206 ===

206<=                PHILOSOPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS       Ilxi

   (In giving all these examples        I am not aiming at some kind of
completeness, some classification of psychological concepts.            They are
only meant to enable the reader to shift for himself when he encounters
conceptual difficulties.)

   "NowI see it as a ... ." goes with "I am trying to see it as a ... ."
or "l can't see it as a .... yet".    But I cannot try to see a conventional
picture of a lion as a lion, any more than an F as that letter. (Though
I may well try to see it as a gallows, for example.)

   Do not ask vourself "How does it work with met”—Ask "What do I
know about someone else?"

    How does one play the game: "It could be this too"?        (What a figure
could also be—which is what it can be seen as—is not simply another

figure. If someone said "I see /& as \
he might still be meaning very different things.)

    Here is a game played by children: they say that a chest, for example,
is a house; and thereupon it is interpreted as a house in every detail.
A piece of fancy is worked into it.

    And does the child now see the chest as a house?
    "He quite forgets that it is a chest; for him it actually is a house."
(There    are   definite   tokens   of thıs.)   Then would     it not    also   be
correct to say he sees it as a house?

    And ıf you knew how to play this game, and, given a particular
 situation, you exclaimed with special expression "Now it's a house!"—
you would be giving expression to the dawning of an aspect.

    If I heard someone talking about the duck-rabbit, and #»ow he spoke
in a certain way about the special expression of the rabbit's face I
 should say, now he's seeing the picture as a rabbit.

    But the expression in one's voice and gestures is the same as ıf the
 object had altered and had ended by hecoming this or that.
    I have a theme played to me several times and each time in a slower
 tempo.   In the end I say "Now it's right", or "Now at last it's a march",
 "Now at last it's a dance".—The same tone of voice expresses the
 dawning of an aspect.

=== p. 207 ===

  Tine shades of behaviour.'—When my understanding of a theme is
expressed by my whistling it with the correct expression, this ıs an
example of such fine shades.

  The aspects of the triangle: it is as ıf an image came into contact,
and for a time remained in contact, with the visual impression.

  In this, however, these aspects differ from the concave and convex
aspects of the step (for example).      And also from the aspects of the
figure

(which I shall call a "double cross") as a white cross on a black
ground and as a black cross on a white ground.

  You must remember that the descriptions of the alternating aspects
are of a different kind in each case.

  (The temptation to say "I see it like fbis”, pointing to the same thing
for "it" and "this".)   Always get rid of the idea of the private object
in this way: assume that it constantly changes, but that you do not
notice the change because your memory constantly deceives you.

  Those two aspects of the double cross (I shall call them the aspects
A) might be reported simply by pointing alternately to an isolated
white and an isolated black cross.
  One could quite well imagine this as a primitive reaction in a child
even before it could talk.
  (Thus in reporting the aspects A we point to a part of the double
cross.—The duck and rabbit aspects could not be described in an
analogous way.)

  You only 'see the duck and rabbit aspects' if you are already conversant with the shapes of those two animals.     There is no analogous condition for seeing the aspects A.

  It is possible to take the duck-rabbit simply for the picture of a
rabbit, the double cross simply for the picture of a black cross, but not
to take the bare triangular figure for the picture of an object that has
fallen over. To see this aspect of the triangle demands imagination.

=== p. 208 ===

,208°                PHILOSOPHICAL          INVESTIGATIONS     Ilxi

    The aspects A are not essentially three-dimensional; a black cross
on a white ground is not essentially a cross with a white surface in the
background.        You could teach someone the idea of the black cross on
a ground of different colour without shewing him anything but crosses
painted     on   sheets     of paper.     Here the 'background' is simply the
surrounding of the cross.
    The aspects A are not connected with the possibility of illusion
in the same way as are the three-dimensional aspects of the drawing of
a cube or step.

   I can see the schematic cube as a box;—but can I also see it now as a
paper, now as a tin, box?—What ought I to say. if someone assured me
he could?—I1 can set a limit to the concept here.
   Yet think of the expression "fe/t"” in connexion with looking at a
picture.    ("One feels the softness of that material") (Knowing in dreams.
"And I knew that          . . .   was in the room.")

   How does one teach a child (say in arithmetic) "Now take these
things     together!"      or     "Now   these   go   together"?      Clearly   "taking
together"    and    "going together"        must originally have had            another
meaning for him than that of seeing ın this way or that.—And this is a
remark about concepts, not about teaching methods.

    One kind of aspect might be called 'aspects of organization'.                When
the aspect changes parts of the picture go together which before did
not.

    In the triangle I can see now this as apex, that as base-—now this as
apex, that as base.—Clearly the words "Now I am seeing this as the
apex" cannot so far mean anything to a learner who has only just
met the concepts of apex, base, and so on.—But I do not mean this
as an empirical proposition.
    "Now he's seeing it like this", "now like that” would only be said of
 someone capable of making certain applications of the figure quite
freely.
    The substratum of this experience is the mastery of a technique.

    But how queer for this to be the logical condition of someone's
having such-and-such an experience”.             After all, you don't say that one
only ‘'has toothache' if one is capable of doing such-and-such.—From
this it follows that we cannot be dealing with the same concept of
experience here.        It is a different though related concept.

=== p. 209 ===

                     PHILOSOPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS           Hxi                2096

  It is only if someone can do, has learnt, is master of, such-and-such,
that it makes sense to say he has had fhis experience.
  And ifthis sounds crazy, you need to reflect that the concept of seeing
is modified here.        (A similar consideration is often necessary to get
rid of a feeling of dizziness in mathematics.)
  We talk, we utter words, and only Jater get a picture of their life.

  For how could I see that this posture was hesitant before I knew
that it was a posture and not the anatomy of the animal?
  But surely that only means that I cannot use Hhis concept to describe
the object of sight, just because it has more than purely visual reference?—
Might I not for all that have a purely visual concept of a hesitant
posture, or of a timid face?

  Such a concept would be comparable with 'major' and 'minor' which
certainly have emotional value, but can also be used purely to describe
a perceived structure.

  The      epithet   "sad",   as   applied   for example   to   the   outline face,
characterizes the grouping of lines in a circle.           Applied to a human
being it has a different (though related) meaning.              (But this does nof
mean that a sad expression is /ike the feeling of sadness!)

  Think of this too: I can only see, not hear, red and green,—but
sadness I can hear as much as I can see it.

  Think of the expression "I heard a plaintive melody”.               And now the
question is: "Does he hear the plaint?"

  And if I reply: "No, he doesn't hear it, he merely has a sense of it"—
where does that get us?            One cannot mention a sense-organ for this
'sense’.
  Some would         like to reply here:       "Of course I hear it!"—Others:
"I don't really bear it."
  We can, however, establish differences of concept here.

  We react to the visual impression differently from someone who does
not recognize it as timid (in the full sense of the word).—ButI do nof
want to say here that we feel this reaction in our muscles and joints
and that this is the 'sensing’.—No, what we have here is a modified
concept of sensation.

=== p. 210 ===

210€           PHILOSOPHICAL      INVESTIGATIONS       IIxi

   One might say of someone that he was blind to the expression of a
face. Would his evesight on that account be defective?
   This is, of course, not simply a question for physiology.     Here the
physiological is a symbol of the logical.

   If you feel the seriousness of a tune, what are you perceiving?—
Nothing that could be conveyed by reproducing what you heard.

   I can imagine some arbitrary cipher—this, for instance:             —

to be a strictly correct letter of some foreign alphabet.     Or again, to
be a faultily written one, and faulty in this way or that: for example,
it might be slap-dash, or typical childish awkwardness, or like the
flourishes in a legal document.    It could deviate, from the correctly
written letter in a variety of ways.—And I can see it in various
aspects according to the fiction I surround it with. And here there is a
close kinship with 'experiencing the meaning of a word'.

   I should like to say that what dawns here lasts only as long as I am
occupied with the object in a particular way.   ("See, it's looking 1") —
T should like to say'-—and is it so?——Ask yourself "For how long
am I struck by a thing?"—For how long do I find it new?

   The aspect presents a physiognomy which then passes away.            It
is almost as if there were a face there which at first I imitate, and then
accept without imitating it.—And isn't this really explanation enough?
—But isn't it too much?

   "I observed the likeness between him and his father for a few
minutes, and then no longer."—One might say this if his face were
changing and only looked like his father's for a short time. But it can
also mean that after a few minutes I stopped being struck by the
likeness.

   "After the likeness had struck you, how long were you aware of it?"
What kind    of answer might one      give   to this   question?—"I   soon
stopped thinking about it", or "It struck me again from time to time",
or "I several times had the thought, how like they arel”, or "I mar-velled at the likeness for at least a minute"—That is the sort of answer
vou would get.

   I should like to put the question "Am I aware of the spatial character,
the depth of an object (of this cupboard for instance), the whole time

=== p. 211 ===

                     PHILOSOPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS Ilxi

I am seeing it?”      Do I, so to speak./*??/ it the whole time?—But put the
question in the third person.—When would you say of someone that he
was aware of it the whole time, and when the opposite?—Of course,
one could ask him,—but how did he learn how to answer such a
question?—He         knows    what it means   "to feel pain   continuously".
But that will only confuse him here (as it confuses me).
   If he now says he is continuously aware of the depth—do I believe
him? And if he says he is aware of it only occasionally (when talking
about it, perhaps)—do I believe that? These answers will strike me as
resting on a false foundation.—It will be different if he says that the
object sometimes strikes him as flat, sometimes as three-dimensional.

   Someone tells me:         "I looked at the flower, but was thinking of
something else and was not conscious of its colour." Do I understand
this?—I can imagine a significant context, say his going on: "Then I
suddenly saw it, and realized it was the one which ... ... "
   Or again;     "If I had turned away then, I could not have sald what
colour it was."
  "He looked at it without seeing it."—There is such a thing. But
what is the criterion for it?—Well, there is a variety of cases here.

  "Just now I looked at the shape rather than at the colour." Do not
let such phrases confuse you. Above all, don't wonder "What can
be going on in the eyes or brain?"

  The likeness makes a striking impression on me; then the impression
fades.
  It only struck me for a few minutes, and then no longer did.
  What happened here?—What can I recall? My own facial expression
comes to mind; I could reproduce it.        If someone who knew me had
seen my face he would have said "Something about his face struck you
just now".—There further occurs to me what I say on such an occasion, out loud or to myself.      And that is all—And is this what being
struck is? No.      These are the phenomena of being struck; but they are
'what happens'.

  Is being struck looking plus thinking?       No.   Many of our concepts
cross here.

  ("Thinking' and 'inward speech'—I do not say           %o oneself*—are
different     concepts.)

=== p. 212 ===

ne                PHILOSOPHICAL     INVESTIGATIONS     Iki

  The colour of the visual impression corresponds to the colour of
‘he object (this blotting paper looks pink to me, and is pink)—the
shape of the visual impression to the shape of the object (it looks rect-mgular to me, and is rectangular)—but what I perceive in the dawning
of an aspect is not a property of the object, but an internal relation
between it and other objects.

  It is almost as ıf 'seeing the sign in this context' were an echo of a
thought.
  "The echo of a thought in sight"—one would like to say.

  Imagine a physiological explanation of the experience.           Let it be
this: When we look at the figure, our eyes scan it repeatedly, always
following a particular path. The path corresponds to a particular
pattern of oscillation of the eyeballs in the act of looking. It is possible
to jump from one such pattern to another and for the two to alternate.
(Aspects A.)     Certain patterns of movement are physiologically impossible; hence, for example, I cannot see the schematic cube as two
interpenetrating prisms.     And so on.    Let this be the explanation.—
"Yes, that shews it is a kind of seeing”—You have now introduced a
new, a physiological, criterion for seeing. And this can screen the old
problem from view, but not solve it.—The purpose of this paragraph
however, was to bring before our view what happens when a physiological explanation is offered.   The psychological concept hangs out of
reach of this explanation.    And this makes the nature of the problem
clearer.

     Do I really see something different each time, or do I only interpret
what I see in a different way? I am inclined to say the former. But
why?—To interpret is to think, to do something; seeing is a state.

  Now it is easy to recognize cases ın which we are interpreting.      When
we interpret we form hypotheses, which may prove false—"I am
seeing this figure as a . . ... " can be verified as little as (or in the same
sense as) "I am seeing bright red".     So there is a similarity in the use
of "seeing" in the two contexts.        Only do not think you knew in
advance what the "srate of seeing" means here!        Let the use feach you
the meaning.

     We find certain things about seeing puzzling, because we do not
find the whole business of seeing puzzling enough.

=== p. 213 ===

                    PHILOSOPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS Ilxi               2130

  If you look at a photograph of people, houses and trees, you do not
feel the lack of the third dimension in it.   We should not find it easy
to describe a photograph as a collection of colour-patches on a flat
surface; but what we see ın a stereoscope looks three-dimensional in
a different way again.

  (It 1s anything but a matter of course that we see 'three-dimensionally' with two eves.     If the two visual images are amalgamated, we
might expect a blurred one as a result.)

  The concept of an aspect is akin to the concept of an image.        In
other words: the concept 1 air now seeing itas . . . .'is akin to 'T am
now having fhis image'.
  Doesn't it take imagination to hear something as a variation on a
particular theme? And yet one is perceiving something in so hearing it.

   "Imagine this changed like this, and you have this other thing."
One can use imagining in the course of proving something.

   Seeing an aspect and imagining are subject to the will.     There is
such an order as "Imagine this”, and also: "Now see the figure like
this”; but not: "Now see this leaf green".

  The question now arises: Could there be human beings lacking in
the capacity to see something as something—and what would that be
like? What sort of consequences would it have?—Would this defect
be comparable to colour-blindness or to not having absolute pitch?—
We will call it "aspect-blindness"—and will next consider what might
be meant by this.    (A conceptual investigation.) The aspect-blind man
1s supposed not to see the aspects A change.     But is he also supposed
not to recognize that the double cross contains both a black and a
white cross?      So if told "Shew me figures containing a black cross
among these examples" will he be unable to manage it? No, he should
be able to do that; but he will not be supposed to say: "Now it's a
black cross on a white ground!"
  Is he supposed to be blind to the similarity between two faces?—
And so also to their identity or approximate identity?    I do not want
to settle this.   (He ought to be able to execute such orders as "Bring
me something that looks like fhis”)

  Ought he to be unable to see the schematic cube as a cube?—It
would not follow from that that he could not recognize it as a representation (a working drawing for instance) of a cube.     But for him it

=== p. 214 ===

2i4°                PHILOSOPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS Ilxi

would not jump from one aspect to the other.—Question: Ought he
to be able to fake it as a cube in certain circumstances, as we do?—
If not, this could not very well be called a sort of blindness.
   The 'aspect-blind' will have an altogether different relationship to
pictures from ours.

   (Anomalies of this kind are easy for us to imagine.)

   Aspect-blindness will be akin to the lack of a 'musical ear'.

   The importance of this concept lies in the connexion between the
concepts of 'seeing an aspect' and 'experiencing the meaning of a
word'.   For we want to       ask "What would you be missing ıf you
did not experience the meaning of a word?"
   What would you be missing, for instance, if you did not understand
the request to pronounce the word "till" and to mean it as a verb,—or
if you did not feel that a word lost its meaning and became a mere
sound ıf it was repeated ten times over?

   In a law-court, for instance, the question might be raised how
someone meant a word. And this can be inferred from certain facts.—
It is a question of intention.   But could how he experienced a word—
the word "bank" for instance—have been significant in the same way?

   Suppose I had agreed on a code with someone;            "tower" means
bank.    I tell him "Now go to the tower"—he understands me and
acts accordingly, but he feels the word "tower" to be strange ın this
use, it has not yet 'taken on' the meaning.

   "When I read a poem or narrative with feeling, surely something
goes on in me which does not go on when I merely skim the lines for
information."—What processes am I alluding to?—The sentences have
a different ring.    1 pay careful attention to my intonation.     Sometimes
a word has the wrong intonation, I emphasize it too much or too little.
I notice this and shew it in my face.       I might later talk about my
reading in detail, for example about the mistakes in my tone of voice.
Sometimes a picture, as it were an illustration, comes to me. And this
seems to help me to read with the correct expression.        And I could
mention a good deal more of the same kind.—I can also give a word
a tone of voice which brings out the meaning of the rest, almost as if
this word were a picture ofthe whole thing.     (And this may, of course,
depend on sentence-formation.)

=== p. 215 ===

  When I pronounce this word while reading with expression it is
completely filled with its meaniıng.—"How can this be, ıf meaning
is the use of the word?" Well, what I said was intended figuratively.
Not that I chose the figure: it forced itself on me.—But the figurative
employment of the word can't get into conflict with the original one.

  Perhaps it could be explained why precisely this picture suggests
itself to me.     (Just think of the expression, and the meaning of the
expression: "the word that hits it off".)

  But if a sentence can strike me as like a painting in words, and the
very individual word in the sentence as like a picture, then it is no such
marvel that a word uttered in i1solation and without purpose can seem
to carry a particular meaning ın itself.

  Think here of a special kind of illusion which throws light on these
matters.—I go for a walk in the environs of a city with a friend.
As we talk it comes out that I am imagining the city to lie on our right.
Not only have I »0 conscious reason for this assumption, but some
quite simple consideration was enough to make me realize that the
city lay rather to the left ahead of us.    I can at first give no answer
to the question why I imagine the city in this direction. I had no reason
to think it.     But though I see no reason still I seem to see certain
psychological causes for it.     In particular, certain associations and
memories.       For example, we walked along a canal, and once before
in similar circumstances I had followed a canal and that time the city
lay on our right.—I might try as it were psychoanalytically to discover
the causes of my unfounded conviction.

  "But what is this queer experience?"—Of course it is not queerer
than any other; it simply differs in kind from those experiences which
we regard as the most fundamental ones, our sense impressions for
instance.

  "I feel as ıf I knew the city lay over there."—"1 feel as ıf the name
'Schubert' fitted Schubert's works and Schubert's face."

  You can say the word "March" to yourself and mean it at one time
as an imperative at another as the name of a month.        And now say
"March!"—and then "March no further\"—Does the same experience
accompany the word both times—are you sure?

  If a sensitive ear shews me, when I am playing this game, that I
have now this now that experience of the word—doesn't it also shew

=== p. 216 ===

216e                  PHILOSOPHICAL       INVESTIGATIONS Ilxi

me that I often do not have any experience of it in the course of talking?—For the fact thatI then also mean it, intend it, now like this now
like thaty and maybe also say so later is, of course, not in question.

     But the question now remains why, in connexion with this game of
experiencing a word, we also speak of 'the meaning' and of 'meaning
it.—This is a different kind of question.——It is the phenomenon
which is characteristic of this language-game that in #is situation we
use this expression: we say we pronounced the word with #his meaning
and take this expression over from that other language-game.
     Call it a dream.   It does not change anything.

     Given the two ideas 'fat' and 'lean', would you be rather inclined
to say     that Wednesday       was     fat and   Tuesday   lean,   or vice versa?
(I     incline   decisively   towards    the   former.)   Now    have    "fat"   and
"lean"     some    different meaning here from their usual one?—They
have a different use.—So ought I really to have used different
words?       Certainly not that—I want to use these words (with their
familiar meanings) sere.—Now, I say nothing about the causes of this
phenomenon. They mightbe associations from my childhood. But that
is a hypothesis.      Whatever the explanation,—the inclination is there.

     Asked   "What do you really mean here by 'fat'              and    'lean'?"—I
could only explain the meanings in the usual way.               I could not point
to the examples of Tuesday and Wednesday.

     Here one might speak of a 'primary' and 'secondary' sense of a
word.     It is only if the word has the primary sense for you that you
use it in the secondary one.

     Only if you have learnt to calculate—on paper or out loud—can
you be made to grasp, by means of this concept, what calculating in
the head is.

     The secondary sense is not a 'metaphorical' sense.          If I say "For me
the vowel e is yellow" I do not mean:              'vellow' in a metaphorical
sense,—for I could not express what I want to say in any other way
than by means of the idea 'vellow'.

     Someone tells me; "Wait for me by the bank”.           Question: Did you,
asyou were saving the word, mean this bank?—This question is of the
same kind as "Did you intend to say such-and-such to him on your
way to meet him?" It refers to a definite time (the time of walking, as
the former question refers to the time of speaking)—but not to an

=== p. 217 ===

                    PHILOSOPHICAL         INVESTIGATIONS           ILri                2176

experience during that time.            Meaning is as little an experience               as
intending.
   But what       distinguishes    them    from    experience?—They have                no
experience-content.        For    the   contents   (images     for instance)       which
accompany and illustrate them are not the meaning or intending.

   The intention with which one acts does not 'accompany' the action
any more than the thought 'accompanies' speech.                    Thought and intention are neither 'articulated' nor 'non-articulated’; to be compared
neither with a single note which sounds during the acting or speaking,
nor with a tune.

   'Talking'    (whether    out    loud   or   silently)    and    ‘'thinking'   are   not
concepts of the same kind; even though they are in closest connexion.

   The interest of the experiences one has while speaking and of the
intention is not the       same.    (The experiences might perhaps inform
a psychologist about the unconscious’ intention.)

   "At that word we both thought of him."                  Let us assume that each
of us said the same words to himself—and how can it mean MORE
than that?—But wouldn't even those words be only a germ?                           They
must surely belong to a language and to a context, in order really to
be the expression of the thought ofthat man.

  If God had looked into our minds he would not have been able to
see there whom we were speaking of.

   "Why did you look at me at that word, were you thinking of. . . .?"
—S0 there is a reaction at a certain moment and it is explained by
saying "I thought of. . . ." or "I suddenly remembered . . . ."

  In saying this you refer to that moment in                      the     time you were
speaking.      It makes a difference whether vou refer to this or to that
moment.

  Mere explanation of a word does not refer to an occurrence at the
moment of speaking.

  The language-game "I mean (or meant) this” (subsequent explanation of a word) is quite different from this one: "I thoughtof ... as I
said it."   The latter is akin to "It reminded me of... "

  "l have already remembered three times today that I must write to
him."   Of what importance is it what went on in me then?—On the

=== p. 218 ===

218*                PHILOSOPHICAL       INVESTIGATIONS Ilxi

other hand what is the importance, what the interest, of the statement
itself?—It permits certain conclusions.

  "At these words he occurred to me."—What is the primitive reaction
with which the language-game begins—which can then be translated
into these words?       How do people get to use these words?
  The primitive reaction may have been a glance or a gesture, but it
may also have been a word.

   "Why did you look at me and shake your head?"—"I wanted to give
you to understand that you ... .. "          This is supposed to express not a
symbolic convention but the purpose of my action.

   Meaning it is not a process which accompanies a word.                 For no
process could have the consequences of meaning.
   (Similarly, I think, it could be said: a calculation is not an experiment, for no experiment could have the peculiar consequences of a
multiplication.)

   There are important accompanying phenomena of talking which are
often missing when one talks without thinking, and this is characteristic
 of talking without thinking.        But they are not the thinking.

   "Now I know!" What went on here?————So did I not know, when
 I declared that now I knew?
   You are looking at it wrong.
   (What is the signal for?)
   And      could the    'knowing'    be    called   an   accompaniment of the
 exclamation?

   The familiar physiognomy of a word, the feeling that it has taken up
 its meaning into itself; that it is an actual likeness of its meaning—there
 could be human beings to whom all this was alien.             (They would not
 have an attachment to their words.)—And how are these feelings
 manifested among us?—By the way we choose and value words.

       How do I find the 'right' word?        How do I choose among words?
 Without doubt it is sometimes as if I were comparing them by fine
 differences of smell: 7hat is too ....... that is too ....... —this is
 the right one.—But I do not always have to make judgments, give
 explanations; often I might only say: "It simply isn't right yet".          I am
 dissatisfied, I go on looking.            At last   a word comes:    "7hat’s it!"
 Sometimes I can say why.       This is simply what searching, this is what
 finding, is like here.

=== p. 219 ===

                  PHILOSOPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS Ikxi                       219*

  But doesn't the word that occurs to you somechow 'come' in a special
way? Just attend and you'll see —Careful attention is no use to me. All
it could discover would be what is now going on in me.
  And how can I, precisely now, listen for it at all?      I ought to have to
wait until a word occurs to me anew.         This, however, is the queer
thing: it seems as though I did not have to wait on the occasion, but
could give myself an exhibition of it, even when it is not actually
taking place.   How?—I act it.—But what can I learn in this way?
What do    I reproduce?—Characteristic accompaniments.             Primarily:
gestures, faces, tones of voice.

  It is possible—and this is important—to say a great deal about a fine
acsthetic difference.—The first thing you say may, of course, be just:
"This word fits, that doesn't"—or something of the kind.            But then
vou can discuss all the extensive ramifications of the tie-up effected
by each of the words.    That first judgment is nof the end of the matter,
for it is the field of force of a word that is decisive.

  "The word is on the tip of my tongue."        What is going on in my
consciousness? That is not the point at all. Whatever did go on was not
what was meant by that expression.      It is of more interest what went
on in my behaviour.—"The word is on the tip of my tongue" tells
you: the word which belongs here has escaped me, but I hope to find it
soon.   For the rest the verbal expression does no more than certain
wordless behaviour.

  James, in writing of this subject, is really trying to say:       "What a
remarkable experience!    The word is not there vet, and yet in a certain
sense is there,—or something is there, which cannot grow into anything
but this word."—But this       is not experience    at all.   Inierpreted as
experience it does indeed look odd.       As does intention, when it is
interpreted as the accompaniment of action; or again, like minus one
interpreted as a cardinal number.

  The words "It's on the tip of my tongue” are no more the expression
of an experience than "Now I know how to go on!"—W’e use them in
certain situations, and they are surrounded by behaviour of a special
kind, and also by some characteristic experiences.         In particular they
are frequently followed by finding the word.       (Ask yourself:      "What
would it be like if human beings never found the word that was on the
tip of their tongue?")

=== p. 220 ===

       Silent 'internal' speech is not a half hidden phenomenon which is
as it were seen through a veil.     It is not hidden af al/, but the concept
may easily confuse us, for it runs over a long stretch cheek by jowl
 with the concept of an 'outward' process, and yet does not coincide
 with it.
       (The question whether the muscles of the larynx are innervated in
 connexion with internal speech, and similar things, may be of great
 interest, but not in our investigation.)

       The close relationship between 'saying inwardly' and 'saying' is
 manifested in the possibility of telling out loud what one said inwardly,
 and of an outward action's accompanying inward speech.             (I can sing
 inwardly, or read silently, or calculate in my head, and beat time with
 my hand as I do so.)

       "But saying things inwardly is surely a certain activity which I
 have to learn 1"     Very well; but what is 'doing' and what is 'learning’
 here?
       Let the use of words teach you their meaning.     (Similarly one can
 often say in mathematics:       let the proof teach you what was          being
 proved.)

       "So I don't really calculate, when I calculate in my head?"—After all,
 you yourself distinguish between calculation in the head and perceptible
  calculation!    But you can only learn what 'calculating in the head' is
  by learning what 'calculating’ is; you can only learn to calculate in your
  head by learning to calculate.

       One can say things in one's head very 'distinctly', when one reproduces the tone of voice of one's sentences by humming (with closed
  lips).    Movements of the larynx help too.   But the remarkable thing is
  precisely that one then hears the talk in one's imagination and does not
  merely/*?*?/ the skeleton of it, so to speak, in one's larynx. (For human
  beings could also well be imagined calculatklg silently with movements
  of the larynx, as one can calculate on one's fingers.)

       A hypothesis, such as that such-and-such went on in our bodies
  when we made internal calculations, is only of interest to us in that it
  points to a possible use of the expression "I       said   ....   to   myself";
  namely that of inferring the physiological process from the expression.

       That what someone else says to himself is hidden from me is part
  of the concept 'saying inwardly'.     Only "hidden" is the wrong word

=== p. 221 ===

                  PHILOSOPHICAL      INVESTIGATIONS     Ikı             221*

here; for if it is hidden from me, it ought to be apparent to him, he
would have to inow it.       But he does not 'know' it; only, the doubt
which exists for me does not exist for him.

   "What anyone says to himself within himself is hidden from me"
might of course also mean that I can for the most part not guess it,
nor can I read it off from, for example, the movements of his throat
(which would be a possibility.)

   "I know what I want, wish, believe, feel, .. ... .. "       (and so on
through all the psychological verbs) is either philosophers' nonsense,
or at any rate nof a judgment a priori.

   "I know . . ." may mean "I do not doubt. . " but does not mean
that the words    "I doubt. . ." are semseless,    that doubt is logically
excluded.

   One says "I know" where one can also say "I believe" or "I suspect";
where one can find out.     (If you bring up against me the case of people's
saying "But I must know ifI am in pain!”, "Only vou can know what
vou feel", and similar things, you should consider the occasion and
purpose of these phrases.     "War is war" is not an example of the law
of identity, cither.)

  It is possible to imagine a case in which I cou/d find out that I had two
hands. Normally, however, I cannordo so.       "But all you need is to hold
them up before your eyes!"—If I am now in doubt whether I have two
hands, I need not believe my eves either.      (I might just as well ask a
friend.)

  With this is connected the fact that, for instance, the proposition
"The Earth has existed for millions of years” makes clearer sense than
"The Earth has existed in the last five minutes”.        For I should ask
anyone who asserted the latter:       "What observations does this proposition refer to; and what observations would count against it?"—
whereas I know what ideas and observations the former proposition
goes with.

  "A new-born child has no teeth."—"A goose has no tecth."—"A
rose has no teeth."—This last at any rate—one would like to say—is
obviously true!   It is even surer than that a goose has none.—And yet
it is none so clear.    For where should a rose's teeth have been?     The
goose has none in its jaw.      And neither, of course, has it any in its

=== p. 222 ===

2*26               PHILOSOPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS IIxi

wings; but no one means that when he says it has no teeth.—Why,
suppose one were to say: the cow chews its food and then dungs the rose
with it, so the rose has teeth in the mouth of a beast.    This would not
be absurd, because one has no notion in advance where to look for
teeth in a rose.   ((Connexion with 'pain in someone else's body'.))

  I can know what someone else is thinking, not what I am thinking.
  It is correct to say "I know what you are thinking", and wrong to
say "l know what I am thinking."
  (A whole cloud of philosophy condensed into a drop of grammar.)

   "A man's thinking goes on within his consciousness in a seclusion
in comparison with which any physical seclusion is an exhibition to
public view."
  If there were people who always read the silent internal discourse
of others—say by observing the larynx—would they too be inclined
to use the picture of complete seclusion?

  If T were to talk to myself out loud in a language not understood by
those present my thoughts would be hidden from them.

  Let us assume there was a man who always guessed right what I
was saying to myself in my thoughts.          (It does not matter how he
manages it.)    But what is the criterion for his guessing right? Well,
I am a truthful person and I confess that he has guessed right —But
might I not be mistaken, can my memory not deceive me? And might it
not always do so when—without lying—I express what I have thought
within myself?——But now it does appear that 'what went on within
me' is not the point at all.    (Here I am drawing a construction-line.)

   The criteria for the truth of'the confession thatI thought such-and-such
are not the criteria for a true description of a process. And the importance of the true confession does not reside ıin its being a correct and
certain report of a process.   It resides rather in the special consequences
which can be drawn from a confession whose truth is guaranteed by
the special criteria of truthfilness.

   (Assuming that dreams can yield important information about the
dreamer, what yielded the information would be truthful accounts of
dreams.   The question whether the dreamer's memory deceives him
when he reports the dream after waking cannot arise, unless indeed
we introduce a completely new criterion for the report's 'agreeing'

=== p. 223 ===

with the dream, a criterion which gives us a concept of 'truth' as
distinct from 'truthfulness' here.)

  There is a game of 'guessing thoughts'. A variant of it would be
this: I tellA something in a language that B does not understand.
B is supposed to guess the meaning of what I say.—Another variant:
I write down a sentence which the other person cannot see. He has to
guess the words or their sense.—Yet another: I am putting a jig-saw
puzzle together; the other person cannot see me but from time to time
guesses my thoughts and utters them.        He says, for instance, "Now
where is this bit?"—"Now I know how it fits!"—"I have no idea what
goes ın here,"—"The sky is always the hardest part" and so on—-but /
need not be talking to myself either out loud or silently at the time.

  All this would be guessing at thoughts; and the fact that it does not
actually happen does not make thought any more hidden than the
unperceived physical proceedings.

  "What is internal ıs hidden from us."—The future is hidden from us.
But does the astronomer think like this when he calculates an eclipse of
the sun?

  If I see someone writhing in pain with evident cause I do not think:
all the same, his feelings are hidden from me.

  We also say of some people that they are transparent to us.            It is,
however, important as regards this observation that one human being
can be a complete enigma to another. We learn this when we come
into a strange country with entirely strange traditions; and, what is
more, even given a mastery of the country's language.           We do not
understand the people. (And not because of not knowing what they are
saying to themselves.) We cannot find our feet with them.

  "I cannot know what is going on in him" is above all apicture.         It is
the convincing expression of a conviction.        It does     not give    the
reasons for the conviction. They are riot readily accessible.

  If a lion could talk, we could not understand him.

  It is possible to imagine a guessing of intentions like the guessing
of thoughts, but also a guessing of what someone is actually going fo do.
  To say "He alone can know what he intends" is nonsense: to say
"He alone can know what he will do", wrong.            For the prediction
contained in my expression of intention (for example "When it strikes

=== p. 224 ===

224«                PHILOSOPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS Iki

five I am going home") need not come true, and someone else may
know what will really happen.

   Two points, however, are important: one, that in many cases someone else cannot predict my actions, whereas I foresee them in my
intentions; the other, that my prediction (in my expression of intention) has not the same foundation as his prediction of what I shall do,
and the conclusions to be drawn from these predictions are quite
different.

   I can be as certain of someone else's sensations as of any fact.       But
this does not make the propositions "He is much depressed”, "25 x
25 = 625" and "l am sixty years old" into similar instruments.            The
explanation suggests itself that the certainty is of a different kind.—
This seems to point to a psychological difference. But the difference is
logical.

   "But, if you are certain, isn't it that you are shutting your eyes ın face
of doubt?"—They are shut.

   Am I      less certain that this man ıs in pain than that twice two ıs
four?—Does this shew the former to be mathematical certainty?
                                                           —
'Mathematical certainty' is not a psychological concept.
   The kind of certainty is the kind of language-game.

       "He alone knows his motives"—that ıs an expression of the fact
that we ask him what his motives are.—If he is sincere he will tell us
them; but I need more than sincerity to guess his motives.             This ıs
where there is a kinship with the case of knowing.

   Let yourself be struck by the existence of such a thing as our language-game of: confessing the motive of my action.

   We remain unconscious of the prodigious diversity of all the everyday language-games because           the clothing of our language       makes
everything alike.
  Something new (spontanecous, 'specific’) ıs always a language-game.

   What is the difference between cause and motive?—How ıs the
motive discovered, and how the cause?

       There is such a question as: "Is this a reliable way of judging people's
motives?"       But ın order to be able to ask this we must know what
 "Jjudging a motive" means; and we do not learn this by being told
what "motive’ ıs and what judging is.

=== p. 225 ===

   One judges the length of a rod and can look for and find some
method of judging it more exactly or more reliably.          So—you say—
what 1s judged here is independent of the method of judging it.       What
length is cannot be defined by the method of determining length.—
To think like this is to make a mistake. What mistake?—To say "The
height of Mont Blanc depends on how one climbs it" would be queer.
And one wants to compare          'ever more accurate measurement of
length' with the nearer and nearer approach to an object.           But ın
certain cases it is, and in certain cases it is nof, clear what "approaching
nearer to the length of an object" means.         What "determining the
length" means is not learned by learning what /ength and determining
are; the meaning of the word "length" is learnt by learning, among
other things, what it is to determine length.
   (For this reason the word "methodology" has a double meaning.
Not only a physical investigation, but also a conceptual one, can be
called "methodological investigation”.)

  We should sometimes like to call certainty and belief tones, colour-ings, of thought; and it is true that they receive expression in the fone
of voice. But do not think of them as 'feelings' which we have in
speaking or thinking.
  Ask, not: "What goes on in us when we are certain that . . . .?"—
but: How is 'the certainty that this ıs the case' manifested iın human
action?

   "While you can have complete certainty about someone else's state
of mind, still it is always merely subjective, not objective, certainty."—
These two words betoken a difference between language-games.

  There can be a dispute over the correct result of a calculation (say
of a rather long addition).    But such disputes are rare and of short
duration. They can be decided, as we say, 'with certainty’,
  Mathematicians do not in general quarrel over the result of a
calculation.   (This is an important fact.)—If it were otherwise, ıf for
mstance one mathematician was convinced that a figure had altered
unperceived, or that his or someone else's memory had been deceived,
and so on—then our concept of 'mathematical certainty’ would not
exist.

  Even then it might always be said: "True we can never know what
the result of a calculation is, but for all that it always has a quite

=== p. 226 ===

2'6«               PHILOSOPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS Iixi

definite result.   (God knows it.)   Mathematics is indeed of the highest
certainty—though we only have a crude reflection of it."

    But am I trying to say some such thing as that the certainty of mathematics is based on the reliability of ink and paper? No.   (That would be
a vicious circle.)—I have not said why mathematicians do not quarrel,
but only that they do not.

    It ıs no doubt true that you could not calculate with certain sorts
of paper and ink, if, that 1s, they were subject to certain queer changes—
but still the fact that they changed could m turn only be got from
memory and comparison with other means of calculation.          And how
are these tested in their turn?

    What has to be accepted, the given, is—so one could say—forms of
life.

    Does it make sense to say that people generally agree in their
judgments of colour? What would it be like for them not to?—One
man would say a flower was red which another called blue, and so on.—
But what right should we have to call these people's words "red"
and"blue" our'colour-words'?"
                            —
    How would they learn to use these words?       Arıd is the language-game which they learn still such as we call the use of 'names of colour'?
There are evidently differences of degree here.

    This consideration must, however, apply to mathematics too.         If
there were not complete agreement, then neither would human beings
be learning the technique which we learn.      It would be more or less
different from ours up to die point of unrecognizability.

    "But mathematical truth ıs independent of whether human beings
know it or not!"—Certainly, the propositions "Human beings believe
that twice two is four” and "Twice two is four" do not mean the
same.    The latter is a mathematical proposition; the other, ıf it makes
sense at all, may perhaps mean: human beings have arrived at the
mathematical proposition. The two propositions have entirely different
uses.—But what would this mean: "Even though everybody believed
that twice two was five it would still be four"?—For what would it be
like for everybody to believe that?—Well, I could imagine, for instance,
that people had a different calculus, or a technique which we should

=== p. 227 ===

not call "calculating”.   But would it be wrong?   (Is a coronation wrong?
To beings different from ourselves ıt might look extremely odd.)

  Of course, in one sense mathematics ıs a branch of knowledge,—
but still it is also an activity.
                            And 'false moves' can only exist as the
exception.   For if what we now call by that name became the rule, the
game in which they were false moves would have been abrogated.

  "We all learn the same multiplication table."    This might, no doubt,
be a remark about the teaching of arithmetic in our schools,—but also
an observation about the concept of the multiplication table.         ("In
a horse-race the horses generally run as fast as they can.")

  There 1s such a thing as colour-blindness and there are ways of
establishing it.
               There is ın general complete agreement ın the judgments of colours made by those who have been diagnosed normal.
This characterizes the concept of a judgment of colour.

  There is in general no such agreement over the question whether
an expression of feeling is genuine or not.

  I am sure, sure, that he is not pretending; but some third person is
not. Can I always convince him? And if not is there some mistake in
his reasoning or observations?

  "You're all at seal"—we say this when someone doubts what we
recognize as clearly genuine—but we cannot prove anything.

  Is there such a thing as 'expert judgment' about the genuineness of
expressions of feeling?—FEven here, there are those whose judgment is
'better' and those whose judgment is 'worse'.
  Correcter prognoses wiD generally issue from the judgments of
those with better knowledge of mankind.
  Can one learn this knowledge?        Yes; some can.     Not, however,
by taking a course ın it, but through "'experience’—Can someone else
be a man's teacher in this? Certainly. From time to time he gives him
the right tip.—This is what 'learning' and 'teaching' are like here.—
What one acquires here is not a technique; one learns correct judgments.
There are also rules, but they do not form a system, and only experienced people can apply them right.    Unlike calculating-rules.

  What is most difficult here ıs to put this indefiniteness, correctly
and unfalsified, into words.

=== p. 228 ===

228«                    PHILOSOPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS          ILri

   "The genuineness of an expression cannot be proved; one has to
feel it"—Very welll—but what does               one go        on to do with this
recognition of genuineness?       If someone says "Voila ce que peut dire
un coeur vraiment ¢"pris"—and if he also brings someone else to the
same mind,—what are the further consequences?                  Or are there none,
and does the game end with one person's relishing what another does
not?
   There are certainly consequences, but of a diffuse kind.             Experience,
that is varied observation, can inform us of them, and they too are
incapable of general formulation; only in scattered cases can one arrive
at a correct and fruitful judgment, establish a fruitful connexion.
And the most general remarks vield at best what looks like the fragments of a system.

   It is certainly possible to be convinced by evidence that someone
is in such-and-such a state of mind, that, for instance, he is not pretending.      But 'evidence' here includes       'imponderable' evidence.

   The question is: what does imponderable evidence accomplish'?
   Suppose      there    were   imponderable       evidence     for   the    chemical
(internal) structure of a substance, still it would have to prove itself
to be evidence by certain consequences which can be weighed.
   (Imponderable evidence might convince someone that a picture was
a genuine      ....   But it is possible for this to be proved right by documentary evidence as well.)

   Imponderable evidence includes subtleties of glance, of gesture, of
tone.
   I    may   recognize    a genuine   loving    look,    distinguish       it from   a
pretended one         (and here there can,      of course,      be    a 'ponderable'
confirmation of my judgment).            But I    may be quite incapable of
describing the difference.      And this not because the languages I know
have no words for it.        For why not introduce new words?-—If I were
a very talented painter I might conceivably represent the genuine and
the simulated glance in pictures.

   Ask vourself: How does a man learn to get a 'nose’ for something?
And how can this nose be used?

   Pretending is, of course, only a special case of someone's producing
(say) expressions of pain when he is not in pain. For if this is possible

=== p. 229 ===

at all, why should it always be pretending that is taking pkce—this
very special pattern in the weave of our lives?

  A child has much to leam before it can pretend.   (A dog cannot be a
hypocrite, but neither can he be sincere.)

  There might actually occur a case where we should say "This man
believes he is pretending.”

