=== chunk: gadamer-1960-truth-and-method/ch4-s2-application ===
title: Ch. 4 §2 — Recovery of the fundamental hermeneutic problem (application)
source_pdf: docs/sources/gadamer-1960-truth-and-method/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 343-372
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 305
plan_page_end: 334
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 305 ===

      understanding. In the process of understanding, a real fusing of horizons
      occurs—which means that as the historical horizon is projected, it is
      simultaneously superseded. To bring about this fusion in a regulated way
      is the task of what we called historically effected consciousness. Although
      this task was obscured by aesthetic-historical positivism following on the
      heels of romantic hermeneutics, it is, in fact, the central problem of
      hermeneutics. It is the problem of application, which is to be found in all
      understanding.

      2 THE RECOVERY OF THE FUNDAMENTAL HERMENEUTIC PROBLEM

                    (A) THE HERMENEUTIC PROBLEM OF APPLICATION

      In the early tradition of hermeneutics, which was completely invisible to
      the historical self-consciousness of post-romantic scientific epistemology,
      this problem had its systematic place. Hermeneutics was subdivided as
      follows: there was a distinction between subtilitas intelligendi (understanding) and subtilitas explicandi (interpretation); and pietism added a
      third element, subtilitas applicandi (application), as in J. J. Rambach. The
      process of understanding was regarded as consisting of these three
      elements. It is notable that all three are called subtilitas—i.e., they are
      considered less as methods that we have at our disposal than as talents
      requiring particular finesse of mind.51 As we have seen, the hermeneutic
      problem acquired systematic importance because the romantics recognized
      the inner unity of intelligere and explicare. Interpretation is not an
      occasional, post facto supplement to understanding; rather, understanding
      is always interpretation, and hence interpretation is the explicit form of
      understanding. In accordance with this insight, interpretive language and
      concepts were recognized as belonging to the inner structure of understanding. This moves the whole problem of language from its peripheral
      and incidental position into the center of philosophy. We will return to this
      point.
         The inner fusion of understanding and interpretation led to the third
      element in the hermeneutical problem, application, becoming wholly
      excluded from any connection with hermeneutics. The edifying application of Scripture in Christian preaching, for example, now seemed very
      different from the historical and theological understanding of it. In the
      course of our reflections we have come to see that understanding always

=== p. 306 ===

involves something like applying the text to be understood to the
interpreter's present situation. Thus we are forced to go one step beyond
romantic hermeneutics, as it were, by regarding not only understanding
and interpretation, but also application as comprising one unified process.
This is not to return to the pietist tradition of the three separate "subtleties," for, on the contrary, we consider application to be just as integral a
part of the hermeneutical process as are understanding and interpretation.52
   The current state of the hermeneutical discussion is what occasions my
emphasizing the fundamental importance of this point. We can appeal first
to the forgotten history of hermeneutics. Formerly it was considered
obvious that the task of hermeneutics was to adapt the text's meaning to
the concrete situation to which the text is speaking. The interpreter of the
divine will who can interpret the oracle's language is the original model for
this. But even today it is still the case that an interpreter's task is not simply
to repeat what one of the partners says in the discussion he is translating,
but to express what is said in the way that seems most appropriate to him,
considering the real situation of the dialogue, which only he knows, since
he alone knows both languages being used in the discussion.
   Similarly, the history of hermeneutics teaches us that besides literary
hermeneutics, there is also a theological and a legal hermeneutics, and
together they make up the full concept of hermeneutics. As a result of the
emergence of historical consciousness in the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries, philological hermeneutics and historical studies cut their ties
with the other hermeneutical disciplines and established themselves as
models of methodology for research in the human sciences.
   The fact that philological, legal, and theological hermeneutics originally
belonged closely together depended on recognizing application as an
integral element of all understanding. In both legal and theological
hermeneutics there is an essential tension between the fixed text—the law
or the gospel—on the one hand and, on the other, the sense arrived at by
applying it at the concrete moment of interpretation, either in judgment or
in preaching. A law does not exist in order to be understood historically,
but to be concretized in its legal validity by being interpreted. Similarly, the
gospel does not exist in order to be understood as a merely historical
document, but to be taken in such a way that it exercises its saving effect.
This implies that the text, whether law or gospel, if it is to be understood
properly—i.e., according to the claim it makes—must be understood at

=== p. 307 ===

  every moment, in every concrete situation, in a new and different way.
  Understanding here is always application.
     We began by showing that understanding, as it occurs in the human
  sciences, is essentially historical—i.e., that in them a text is understood
  only if it is understood in a different way as the occasion requires. Precisely
  this indicates the task of a historical hermeneutics: to consider the tension
  that exists between the identity of the common object and the changing
  situation in which it must be understood. We began by saying that the
  historical movement of understanding, which romantic hermeneutics
  pushed to the periphery, is the true center of hermeneutical inquiry
  appropriate to historical consciousness. Our consideration of the significance of tradition in historical consciousness started from Heidegger's
  analysis of the hermeneutics of facticity and sought to apply it to a
  hermeneutics of the human sciences. We showed that understanding is not
  a method which the inquiring consciousness applies to an object it chooses
  and so turns it into objective knowledge; rather, being situated within an
  event of tradition, a process of handing down, is a prior condition of
  understanding. Understanding proves to be an event, and the task of hermeneutics, seen philosophically, consists in asking what kind of understanding, what kind of science it is, that is itself advanced by historical
  change.
     We are quite aware that we are asking something unusual of the self-understanding of modern science. All of our considerations thus far have
  been directed toward making this task easier by showing that it results
  from the convergence of a large number of problems. In fact, hermeneutical theory hitherto falls apart into distinctions that it cannot itself
  maintain. This is seen clearly in the attempt to construct a general theory
  of interpretation. When a distinction is made between cognitive, normative, and reproductive interpretation, as in Betti's General Theory of Interpretation^ which is based on a remarkable knowledge and survey of the
  subject, difficulties arise in categorizing phenomena according to this
  division. This is especially true of scholarly interpretation. If we put
  theological interpretation together with legal interpretation and assign
  them a normative function, then we must remember Schleiermacher who,
  on the contrary, closely connected theological interpretation with general
  interpretation, which was for him the philological-historical one. In fact,
  the split between the cognitive and the normative function runs right
  through theological hermeneutics and can hardly be overcome by distinguishing scientific knowledge from the subsequent edifying application.

=== p. 308 ===

The split runs through legal interpretation also, in that discovering the
meaning of a legal text and discovering how to apply it in a particular legal
instance are not two separate actions, but one unitary process.
   But even the kind of interpretation that seems furthest from the kinds
we have been considering, namely performative interpretation, as in the
cases of music and drama—and they acquire their real existence only in
being played 54 —is scarcely an independent mode of interpretation. In it
too there is a split between the cognitive and the normative function. No
one can stage a play, read a poem, or perform a piece of music without
understanding the original meaning of the text and presenting it in his
reproduction and interpretation. But, similarly, no one will be able to make
a performative interpretation without taking account of that other normative element—the stylistic values of one's own day—which, whenever a
text is brought to sensory appearance, sets limits to the demand for a
stylistically correct reproduction. When we consider that translating texts
in a foreign language, imitating them, or even reading texts aloud
correctly, involves the same explanatory achievement as philological
interpretation, so that the two things become as one, then we cannot avoid
the conclusion that the suggested distinction between cognitive, normative, and reproductive interpretation has no fundamental validity, but all
three constitute one unitary phenomenon.
   If this is the case, then we have the task of redefining the hermeneutics of
the human sciences in terms of legal and theological hermeneutics. For this we
must remember the insight gained from our investigation into romantic
hermeneutics, namely that both it and its culmination in psychological
interpretation—i.e., deciphering and explaining the individuality of the
other—treat the problem of understanding in a way that is far too one-sided. Our line of thought prevents us from dividing the hermeneutic
problem in terms of the subjectivity of the interpreter and the objectivity
of the meaning to be understood. This would be starting from a false
antithesis that cannot be resolved even by recognizing the dialectic of
subjective and objective. To distinguish between a normative function and
a cognitive one is to separate what clearly belong together. The meaning of
a law that emerges in its normative application is fundamentally no
different from the meaning reached in understanding a text. It is quite
mistaken to base the possibility of understanding a text on the postulate of
a "con-geniality" that supposedly unites the creator and the interpreter of
a work. If this were really the case, then the human sciences would be in
a bad way. But the miracle of understanding consists in the fact that no

=== p. 309 ===

  like-mindedness is necessary to recognize what is really significant and
  fundamentally meaningful in tradition. We have the ability to open
  ourselves to the superior claim the text makes and to respond to what it
  has to tell us. Hermeneutics in the sphere of philology and the historical
  sciences is not "knowledge as domination"55—i.e., an appropriation as
  taking possession; rather, it consists in subordinating ourselves to the text's
  claim to dominate our minds. Of this, however, legal and theological
  hermeneutics are the true model. To interpret the law's will or the
  promises of God is clearly not a form of domination but of service. They are
  interpretations—which includes application—in the service of what is
  considered valid. Our thesis is that historical hermeneutics too has a task of
  application to perform, because it too serves applicable meaning, in that it
  explicitly and consciously bridges the temporal distance that separates the
  interpreter from the text and overcomes the alienation of meaning that the
  text has undergone.56

                (B) THE HERMENEUTIC RELEVANCE OF ARISTOTLE57

  At this point a problem arises that we have touched on several times. If the
  heart of the hermeneutical problem is that one and the same tradition
  must time and again be understood in a different way, the problem,
  logically speaking, concerns the relationship between the universal and
  the particular. Understanding, then, is a special case of applying something
  universal to a particular situation. This makes Aristotelian ethics especially
  important for us—we touched on it in the introductory remarks on the
  theory of the human sciences.58 It is true that Aristotle is not concerned
  with the hermeneutical problem and certainly not with its historical
  dimension, but with the right estimation of the role that reason has to play
  in moral action. But what interests us here is precisely that he is concerned
  with reason and with knowledge, not detached from a being that is
  becoming, but determined by it and determinative of it. By circumscribing
  the intellectualism of Socrates and Plato in his inquiry into the good,
  Aristotle became the founder of ethics as a discipline independent of
  metaphysics. Criticizing the Platonic idea of the good as an empty
  generality, he asks instead the question of what is humanly good, what is
  good in terms of human action.59 His critique demonstrates that the
  equation of virtue and knowledge, arete and logos, which is the basis of
  Plato's and Socrates' theory of virtue, is an exaggeration. Aristotle restores
  the balance by showing that the basis of moral knowledge in man is orexis,

=== p. 310 ===

striving, and its development into a fixed demeanor (hexis). The very
name "ethics" indicates that Aristotle bases arete on practice and
"ethos."
   Human civilization differs essentially from nature in that it is not simply
a place where capacities and powers work themselves out; man becomes
what he is through what he does and how he behaves—i.e., he behaves in
a certain way because of what he has become. Thus Aristotle sees ethos as
differing from physis in being a sphere in which the laws of nature do not
operate, yet not a sphere of lawlessness but of human institutions and
human modes of behavior which are mutable, and like rules only to a
limited degree.
   The question is whether there can be any such thing as philosophical
knowledge of the moral being of man and what role knowledge (i.e.,
logos) plays in the moral being of man. If man always encounters the good
in the form of the particular practical situation in which he finds himself,
the task of moral knowledge is to determine what the concrete situation
asks of him—or, to put it another way, the person acting must view the
concrete situation in light of what is asked of him in general. But—negatively put—this means that knowledge that cannot be applied to the
concrete situation remains meaningless and even risks obscuring what the
situation calls for. This state of affairs, which represents the nature of moral
reflection, not only makes philosophical ethics a methodologically difficult
problem, but also gives the problem of method a moral relevance. In contrast to
the theory of the good based on Plato's doctrine of ideas, Aristotle
emphasizes that it is impossible for ethics to achieve the extreme exactitude of mathematics. Indeed, to demand this kind of exactitude would be
inappropriate. What needs to be done is simply to make an outline and by
means of this sketch give some help to moral consciousness.60 But how
such help can be possible is already a moral problem. For obviously it is
characteristic of the moral phenomenon that the person acting must
himself know and decide, and he cannot let anything take this responsibility from him. Thus it is essential that philosophical ethics have the right
approach, so that it does not usurp the place of moral consciousness and
yet does not seek a purely theoretical and "historical" knowledge either
but, by outlining phenomena, helps moral consciousness to attain clarity
concerning itself. This asks a lot of the person who is to receive this help,
namely the person listening to Aristotle's lecture. He must be mature
enough not to ask that his instruction provide anything other than it can
and may give. To put it positively, through education and practice he must

=== p. 311 ===

  himself already have developed a demeanor that he is constantly concerned to preserve in the concrete situations of his life and prove through
  right behavior.61
     As we see, the problem of method is entirely determined by the
  object—a general Aristotelian principle—and the important thing for us is
  to examine more closely the curious relation between moral being and
  moral consciousness that Aristotle sets out in his Ethics. Aristotle remains
  Socratic in that he retains knowledge as an essential component of moral
  being, and it is precisely the balance between the heritage of Socrates and
  Plato and Aristotle's point concerning ethos that interests us. For the
  hermeneutical problem too is clearly distinct from "pure" knowledge detached from
  any particular kind of being. We spoke of the interpreter's belonging to the
  tradition he is interpreting, and we saw that understanding itself is a
  historical event. The alienation of the interpreter from the interpreted by
  the objectifying methods of modern science, characteristic of the hermeneutics and historiography of the nineteenth century, appeared as the
  consequence of a false objectification. My purpose in returning to the
  example of Aristotelian ethics is to help us realize and avoid this. For moral
  knowledge, as Aristotle describes it, is clearly not objective knowledge—i.e., the knower is not standing over against a situation that he
  merely observes; he is directly confronted with what he sees. It is
  something that he has to do.62
     Obviously this is not what we mean by knowing in the realm of science.
  Thus the distinction that Aristotle makes between moral knowledge
  (phronesis) and theoretical knowledge (episteme) is a simple one, especially when we remember that science, for the Greeks, is represented by
  the model of mathematics, a knowledge of what is unchangeable, a
  knowledge that depends on proof and that can therefore be learned by
  anybody. A hermeneutics of the human sciences certainly has nothing to
  learn from mathematical as distinguished from moral knowledge. The
  human sciences stand closer to moral knowledge than to that kind of
  "theoretical" knowledge. They are "moral sciences." Their object is man
  and what he knows of himself. But he knows himself as an acting being,
  and this kind of knowledge of himself does not seek to establish what is.
  An active being, rather, is concerned with what is not always the same but
  can also be different. In it he can discover the point at which he has to act.
  The purpose of his knowledge is to govern his action.
     Here lies the real problem of moral knowledge that occupies Aristotle in
  his Ethics. For we find action governed by knowledge in an exemplary form

=== p. 312 ===

where the Greeks speak of techne. This is the skill, the knowledge of the
craftsman who knows how to make some specific thing. The question is
whether moral knowledge is knowledge of this kind. This would mean that
it was knowledge of how to make oneself. Does man learn to make himself
what he ought to be, in the same way that the craftsman learns to make
things according to his plan and will? Does man project himself on an eidos
of himself in the same way that the craftsman carries within himself an
eidos of what he is trying to make and embody in his material? We know
that Socrates and Plato did apply the concept of techne to the concept of
man's being, and it is undeniable that they did discover something true
here. In the political sphere, at any rate, the model of techne has an
eminently critical function, in that it reveals the untenability of what is
called the art of politics, in which everyone involved in politics—i.e., every
citizen—regards himself as an expert. Characteristically, the knowledge of
the craftsman is the only one that Socrates, in his famous account of his
experience of his fellow-countrymen, recognizes as real knowledge within
its own sphere. 6? But even the craftsmen disappoint him. Their knowledge
is not the true knowledge that constitutes a man and a citizen as such. But
it is real knowledge. It is a real art and skill, and not simply a high degree
of experience. In this respect it is clearly one with the true moral
knowledge that Socrates is seeking. Both are practical knowledge—i.e.,
their purpose is to determine and guide action. Consequently, they must
include the application of knowledge to the particular task.
   This is the point at which we can relate Aristotle's analysis of moral
knowledge to the hermeneutical problem of the modern human sciences.
Admittedly, hermeneutical consciousness is involved neither with technical nor moral knowledge, but these two types of knowledge still include the
same task of application that we have recognized as the central problem of
hermeneutics. Certainly application does not mean the same thing in each
case. There is a curious tension between a techne that can be taught and
one acquired through experience. The prior knowledge that a person has
who has been taught a craft is not, in practice, necessarily superior to the
kind of knowledge that someone has who is untrained but has had
extensive experience. Although this is the case, the prior knowledge
involved in a techne cannot be called "theoretical," especially since
experience is automatically acquired in using this knowledge. For, as
knowledge, it is always related to practical application, and even if the
recalcitrant material does not always obey the person who has learned his
craft, Aristotle can still rightly quote the words of the poet: "Techne loves

=== p. 313 ===

  tyche (luck) and tyche loves techne." This means that the person who has
  been taught his trade is will have the most luck. A genuine mastery of the
  matter is acquired practically in the techne, and just this provides a model
  for moral knowledge. For in moral knowledge too it is clear that experience can never be sufficient for making right moral decisions. Here too
  moral consciousness itself calls for prior direction to guide action; indeed,
  we cannot be content here with the uncertain relation between prior
  knowledge and success in the present case that obtains in the case of a
  techne. There is, no doubt, a real analogy between the fully developed
  moral consciousness and the capacity to make something—i.e., a techne
  —but they are certainly not the same.
     On the contrary, the differences are patent. It is obvious that man is not
  at his own disposal in the same way that the craftsman's material is at his
  disposal. Clearly he cannot make himself in the same way that he can
  make something else. Thus it will have to be another kind of knowledge
  that he has of himself in his moral being, a knowledge that is distinct from
  the knowledge that guides the making of something. Aristotle captures this
  difference in a bold and unique way when he calls this kind of knowledge
  self-knowledge—i.e., knowledge for oneself.64 This distinguishes the self-knowledge of moral consciousness from theoretical knowledge in a way that
  seems immediately evident. But it also distinguishes it from technical
  knowledge, and to make this double distinction Aristotle ventures the odd
  expression "self-knowledge."
     It is the distinction from technical knowledge that is the more difficult
  task if, with Aristotle, we define the "object" of this knowledge ontologically not as something general that always is as it is, but as something
  individual that can also be different. For at first sight the tasks seem wholly
  analogous. A person who knows how to make something knows something good, and he knows it "for himself," so that, where there is the
  possibility of doing so, he is really able to make it. He takes the right
  material and chooses the right means to do the work. Thus he must know
  how to apply what has been learned in a general way to the concrete
  situation. Is the same not true of moral consciousness? A person who has
  to make moral decisions has always already learned something. He has
  been so formed by education and custom that he knows in general what is
  right. The task of making a moral decision is that of doing the right thing
  in a particular situation—i.e., seeing what is right within the situation and
  grasping it. He too has to act, choosing the right means, and his conduct

=== p. 314 ===

must be governed just as carefully as that of the craftsman. How then is it
nevertheless a knowledge of a quite different kind?
   From Aristotle's analysis of phronesis one can derive a variety of answers
to this question, for Aristotle's ability to describe phenomena from every
aspect constitutes his real genius. "The empirical, comprehended in its
synthesis, is the speculative concept" (Hegel).65 Let us consider here a few
points that are important for our discussion.
    1. We learn a techne and can also forget it. But we do not learn moral
knowledge, nor can we forget it. We do not stand over against it, as if it
were something that we can acquire or not, as we can choose to acquire an
objective skill, a techne. Rather, we are always already in the situation of
having to act (disregarding the special position of children, for whom
obedience to the person educating them replaces their own decision), and
hence we must already possess and be able to apply moral knowledge. That
is why the concept of application is highly problematical. For we can only
apply something that we already have; but we do not possess moral
knowledge in such a way that we already have it and then apply it to
specific situations. The image that a man has of what he ought to be—i.e.,
his ideas of right and wrong, of decency, courage, dignity, loyalty, and so
forth (all concepts that have their equivalents in Aristotle's catalogue of
virtues)—are certainly in some sense images that he uses to guide his
conduct. But there is still a basic difference between this and the guiding
image the craftsman uses: the plan of the object he is going to make. What
is right, for example, cannot be fully determined independently of the
situation that requires a right action from me, whereas the eidos of what
a craftsman wants to make is fully determined by the use for which it is
intended.
   It is true that what is right seems equally determinate in an absolute
sense. For what is right is formulated in laws and contained in general
rules of conduct that, although uncodified, can be very exactly determined
and are universally binding. Thus, administering justice is a special task
that requires both knowledge and skill. Is it not a techne, then? Does it not
also consist in applying laws and rules to the concrete case? Do we not
speak of the "art" of the judge? Why is what Aristotle describes as the
judge's form of phronesis (dikastike phronesis) not a techne?66
   If we think about it, we shall see that applying laws involves a curious
legal ambiguity. The situation of the craftsman is quite different. With the
design of the object and the rules for executing it, the craftsman proceeds

=== p. 315 ===

  to carry it out. He may be forced to adapt himself to particular circumstances; he may have to resign himself to executing his design in a way
  other than he originally intended. But this resignation does not mean that
  his knowledge of what he wants is improved. Rather, he simply omits
  certain things in the execution. What we have here is the painful
  imperfection associated with applying one's knowledge.
     By comparison, the situation of the person "applying" law is quite
  different. In a certain instance he will have to refrain from applying the full
  rigor of the law. But if he does, it is not because he has no alternative, but
  because to do otherwise would not be right. In restraining the law, he is
  not diminishing it but, on the contrary, finding the better law. Aristotle67
  expresses this very clearly in his analysis of epieikeia (equity): epieikeia is
  the correction of the law.68 Aristotle shows that every law is in a necessary
  tension with concrete action, in that it is general and hence cannot contain
  practical reality in its full concreteness. We have already touched on this
  problem near the beginning of the present volume when we were
  considering the faculty of judgment. 69 Clearly legal hermeneutics finds its
  proper place here.70 The law is always deficient, not because it is imperfect
  in itself but because human reality is necessarily imperfect in comparison
  to the ordered world of law, and hence allows of no simple application of
  the law.
     From what we have said it is clear that Aristotle's position on the
  problem of natural law is highly subtle and certainly not to be equated with
  the later natural-law tradition. I will briefly outline the way the idea of
  natural law is related to the hermeneutical problem.71 It follows from our
  discussion so far that Aristotle does not simply dismiss the question of
  natural law. He does not regard a system of laws as true law in an absolute
  sense, but considers the concept of equity as a necessary supplement to
  law. Thus he opposes an extreme conventionalism or legal positivism by
  explicitly distinguishing between what is naturally right and what is legally
  right.72 The distinction he has in mind is not simply that between the
  unchangeability of natural law and the changeability of positive law. It is
  true that Aristotle has generally been understood as meaning this. But the
  true profundity of his insight has been missed. Certainly he accepts the
  idea of an absolutely unchangeable law, but he limits it explicitly to the
  gods and says that among men not only statutory law but also natural law
  is changeable. For Aristotle, this changeability is wholly compatible with
  the fact that it is "natural" law. The sense of this assertion seems to me to
  be the following: some laws are entirely a matter of mere agreement (e.g.,

=== p. 316 ===

traffic regulations), but there are also things that do not admit of regulation
by mere human convention because the "nature of the thing" constantly
asserts itself. Thus it is quite legitimate to call such things "natural law."73
In that the nature of the thing still allows some room for play, natural law
is still changeable. This is clearly evidenced by the examples that Aristotle
adduces from other spheres. The right hand is naturally the stronger one,
but there is nothing to stop us from training the left one so that it becomes
as strong as the right (Aristotle obviously uses this example because it was
a favorite of Plato's). A second example is even more illuminating because
it already belongs in the legal sphere: one and the same measure always
proves smaller when we buy wine in it than when we sell wine in it.
Aristotle is not saying that people in the wine trade are constantly trying
to trick their customers, but rather that this behavior corresponds to the
area of free play permitted within the set limits ol what is right. And he
quite clearly explains that the best state "is everywhere one and the same,"
but it is the same in a different way that "fire burns everywhere in the
same way, whether in Greece or in Persia."
   Despite this clear statement by Aristotle, later thinkers on natural law
quoted this passage as if he were comparing the unchangeability of human
law with the unchangeability of natural laws.74 The opposite is the case. In
fact, as his very distinction shows, for Aristotle the idea of natural law has
only a critical function. No dogmatic use can be made of it—i.e., we cannot
invest particular laws with the dignity and inviolability of natural law. In
view of the necessary imperfection of all human laws, the idea of natural
law is indispensable for Aristotle; and it becomes particularly important in
the question of what is equitable, which is what first really decides the law.
But its function is a critical one in that the appeal to natural law is
legitimate only where a discrepancy emerges between one law and
another.
   The special question of natural law, which Aristotle answers in extenso,
does not as such interest us here, except by reason of its fundamental
significance. For what Aristotle shows here is true of all man's ideas of
what he ought to be, and not only of the problem of law. All these concepts
are not just arbitrary ideals conditioned by convention, but despite all the
variety of moral ideas in the most different times and peoples, in this
sphere there is still something like the nature of the thing. This is not to say
that the nature ol the thing—e.g., the ideal of bravery—is a fixed standard
that we could recognize and apply by ourselves. Rather, Aristotle affirms as
true of the teacher of ethics precisely what is true, in his view, of all men:

=== p. 317 ===

  that he too is always already involved in a moral and political context and
  acquires his image of the thing from that standpoint. He does not himself
  regard the guiding principles that he describes as knowledge that can be
  taught. They are valid only as schemata. They are concretized only in the
  concrete situation of the person acting. Thus they are not norms to be
  found in the stars, nor do they have an unchanging place in a natural
  moral universe, so that all that would be necessary would be to perceive
  them. Nor are they mere conventions, but really do correspond to the
  nature of the thing—except that the latter is always itself determined in
  each case by the use the moral consciousness makes of them.
     2. Here we see a fundamental modification of the conceptual relation
  between means and end, one that distinguishes moral from technical
  knowledge. It is not only that moral knowledge has no merely particular
  end but pertains to right living in general, whereas all technical knowledge
  is particular and serves particular ends. Nor is it the case simply that moral
  knowledge must take over where technical knowledge would be desirable
  but is unavailable. Certainly if technical knowledge were available, it
  would always make it unnecessary to deliberate with oneself about the
  subject. Where there is a techne, we must learn it and then we are able to
  find the right means. We see that moral knowledge, however, always
  requires this kind of self-deliberation. Even if we conceive this knowledge
  in ideal perfection, it is perfect deliberation with oneself (euboulia) and not
  knowledge in the manner of a techne.
     Thus we are dealing here with a fundamental relationship. It is not the
  case that extending technical knowledge would obviate the need for moral
  knowledge, this deliberating with oneself. Moral knowledge can never be
  knowable in advance like knowledge that can be taught. The relation
  between means and ends here is not such that one can know the right
  means in advance, and that is because the right end is not a mere object of
  knowledge either. There can be no anterior certainty concerning what the
  good life is directed toward as a whole. Hence Aristotle's definitions of
  phronesis have a marked uncertainty about them, in that this knowledge
  is sometimes related more to the end, and sometimes more to the means
  to the end. 75 In fact this means that the end toward which our life as a
  whole tends and its elaboration in the moral principles of action described
  in Aristotle's Ethics cannot be the object of a knowledge that can be taught.
  No more can ethics be used dogmatically than can natural law. Rather,
  Aristotle's theory of virtue describes typical forms of the true mean to be
  observed in human life and behavior; but the moral knowledge that is

=== p. 318 ===

oriented by these guiding images is the same knowledge that has to
respond to the demands of the situation of the moment.
   Hence also mere expediency cannot enter considerations about what
might further moral ends; rather, the consideration of the means is itself a
moral consideration and it is this that concretizes the moral Tightness of the
end. The self-knowledge of which Aristotle speaks is characterized by the
fact that it includes perfect application and employs its knowledge in the
immediacy of the given situation. Thus a knowledge of the particular
situation (which is nevertheless not a perceptual seeing) is a necessary
supplement to moral knowledge. For although it is necessary to see what
a situation is asking of us, this seeing does not mean that we perceive in the
situation what is visible as such, but that we learn to see it as the situation
of action and hence in the light of what is right. Just as we "see" from the
geometrical analysis of plane surfaces that the triangle is the simplest two-dimensional plane figure, so that we can go no lurlher with our subdivisions, but must stop here, so also in moral deliberation, seeing what is
immediately to be done is not a mere seeing but nous. This is also
confirmed by what constitutes the opposite of this kind of seeing.76 The
opposite of seeing what is right is not error or deception but blindness. A
person who is overwhelmed by his passions suddenly no longer sees what
is right to do in a given situation. He has lost his self-mastery and hence his
own Tightness—i.e., the right orientation within himself—so that, driven
by the dialectic of passion, whatever his passion tells him is right seems so.
Moral knowledge is really knowledge of a special kind. In a curious way it
embraces both means and end, and hence differs from technical knowledge. That is why it is pointless to distinguish here between knowledge and
experience, as can be done in the case of a techne. For moral knowledge
contains a kind of experience in itself, and in fact we shall see that this is
perhaps the fundamental form of experience (Erfahrung), compared with
which all other experience represents an alienation, not to say a denaturing. 77
   3. The sell-knowledge of moral reflection has, in fact, a unique relation
to itself. We can see this from the modifications that Aristotle presents in
the context of his analysis of phronesis. Beside phronesis, the virtue of
thoughtful reflection, stands "sympathetic understanding." 78 "Being
understanding" is introduced as a modification of the virtue of moral
knowledge since in this case it is not I who must act. Accordingly synesis
means simply the capacity for moral judgment. Someone's sympathetic
understanding is praised, of course, when in order to judge he transposes

=== p. 319 ===

  himself fully into the concrete situation ol the person who has to act.79 The
  question here, then, is not about knowledge in general but its concretion
  at a particular moment. This knowledge also is not in any sense technical
  knowledge or the application of such. The man of the world, the man who
  knows all the tricks and dodges and is experienced in everything there is,
  does not really have sympathetic understanding for the person acting: he
  has it only if he satisfies one requirement, namely that he too is seeking
  what is right—i.e., that he is united with the other person in this
  commonality. The concrete example of this is the phenomenon of advice in
  "questions of conscience." Both the person asking for advice and the
  person giving it assume that they are bound together in friendship. Only
  friends can advise each other or, to put it another way, only a piece of
  advice that is meant in a friendly way has meaning for the person advised.
  Once again we discover that the person who is understanding does not
  know and judge as one who stands apart and unaffected but rather he
  thinks along with the other from the perspective of a specific bond of
  belonging, as if he too were affected.
     This becomes fully clear when we consider other varieties of moral
  reflection listed by Aristotle, namely insight and fellow feeling.80 Insight
  here means a quality. We say that someone is insightful when they make
  a fair, correct judgment. An insightful person is prepared to consider the
  particular situation of the other person, and hence he is also most inclined
  to be forbearing or to forgive. Here again it is clear that this is not technical
  knowledge.
     Finally, Aristotle makes the special nature of moral knowledge and the
  virtue of possessing it particularly clear by describing a naturally debased
  version of this moral knowledge. 81 He says that the deinos is a man who
  has all the natural prerequisites and gifts for this moral knowledge, a man
  who is able, with remarkable skill, to get the most out of any situation,
  who is able to turn everything to his advantage and finds a way out of
  every situation. 82 But this natural counterpart to phronesis is characterized
  by the fact that the deinos is "capable of anything"; he uses his skills to any
  purpose and is without inhibition. He is aneu aretes. And it is more than
  accidental that such a person is given a name that also means "terrible."
  Nothing is so terrible, so uncanny, so appalling, as the exercise of brilliant
  talents for evil.
     To summarize, if we relate Aristotle's description of the ethical phenomenon and especially the virtue of moral knowledge to our own investigation, we find that his analysis in fact offers a kind of model of the problems

=== p. 320 ===

of hermeneutics. We too determined that application is neither a subsequent
nor merely an occasional part of the phenomenon of understanding, but
codetermines it as a whole from the beginning. Here too application did
not consist in relating some pregiven universal to the particular situation.
The interpreter dealing with a traditionary text tries to apply it to himself.
But this does not mean that the text is given for him as something
universal, that he first understands it per se, and then afterward uses it for
particular applications. Rather, the interpreter seeks no more than to
understand this universal, the text—i.e., to understand what it says, what
constitutes the text's meaning and significance. In order to understand
that, he must not try to disregard himself and his particular hermeneutical
situation. He must relate the text to this situation if he wants to understand
at all.

          (c)   THE EXEMPLARY SIGNIFICANCE OF LEGAL HERMENEUTICS

If this is the case, the gap between hermeneutics of the human sciences
and legal hermeneutics cannot be as wide as is generally assumed. The
dominant view is, of course, that only with the rise of historical consciousness was understanding raised to a method of objective science and that
hermeneutics came into its own when it was elaborated into a general
theory of the understanding and interpretation of texts. Legal herme-neulics does not belong in this context, for its purpose is not to understand
given texts, but to be a practical measure filling a kind of gap in the system
of legal dogmatics. It is thought, then, that it has nothing to do with the
task of hermeneutics in the human sciences, which is the understanding of
traditionary material.
    But in that case theological hermeneutics cannot claim any independent
systematic significance. Schleiermacher consciously placed it wholly
within general hermeneutics and merely regarded it as a special application of
it. Since then, scientific theology's claim to be a discipline on a par with the
modern historical sciences seems to depend on the fact that no laws and
rules are to be applied in interpreting Scripture other than those used in
understanding any other traditionary material. Thus there could no longer
be any such thing as a specifically theological hermeneutics.
    It is a paradoxical position if we, nevertheless, try to revive the old truth
and the old unity of hermeneutical discipline within modern science. It
seems that methodology of the human sciences moves into modernity
when it detaches itself from all dogmatic ties. Legal hermeneutics was

=== p. 321 ===

  separated from theory of understanding as a whole because it has a
  dogmatic purpose, just as, by giving up its dogmatic commitment, theological hermeneutics was united with philological-historical method.
     In this situation we can take special interest in the divergence between
  legal and historical hermeneutics and consider those cases in which legal
  and historical hermeneutics are concerned with the same object—i.e.,
  cases in which legal texts are interpreted legally, in court, and also
  understood historically. So we will consider the approaches taken by the
  legal historian and the jurist to the same legal text. We can turn here to the
  excellent writings of E. Betti83 and pursue our own thinking from there.
  Our question is whether or not there is an unequivocal distinction between
  dogmatic and historical interest.
     That there is a difference is clear. The jurist understands the meaning of
  the law from the present case and for the sake of this present case. By
  contrast, the legal historian has no case from which to start, but he seeks
  to determine the meaning of the law by constructing the whole range of its
  applications. It is only in all its applications that the law becomes concrete.
  Thus the legal historian cannot be content to take the original application
  of the law as determining its original meaning. As a historian he will,
  rather, have to take account of the historical change that the law has
  undergone. In understanding, he will have to mediate between the
  original application and the present application of the law.
      In my view it would not be enough to say that the task of the historian
  was simply to "reconstruct the original meaning of the legal formula" and
  that of the jurist to "harmonize that meaning with the present living
  actuality." This kind of division would mean that the definition of the jurist
  is more comprehensive and includes the task of the legal historian.
  Someone who is seeking to understand the correct meaning of a law must
  first know the original one. Thus he must think in terms of legal
  history—but here historical understanding serves merely as a means to an
  end. On the other hand, the historian as such has no dogmatic task. As a
  historian he approaches the historical object in order to determine its
  historical value, whereas the jurist, in addition, applies what has been
  learned in this way to the legal present. This is what Betti says.
      We may ask, however, whether he has viewed and described the task of
  the historian in a sufficiently comprehensive way. In our particular
   example, where does the historical element come in? In regard to a law
   still in force we naturally assume that its legal meaning is clear and that the
  legal practice of the present simply follows the original meaning. If this

=== p. 322 ===

were always the case, the question about the meaning of a law would be
both juridically and historically the same. For the jurist too the hermeneutical task would be just to establish the original meaning of the law and
apply it as the right one. Hence as late as 1840, Savigny, in his System des
romischen Rechts, regarded the task of legal hermeneutics as purely historical. Just as Schleiermacher saw no problem in the interpreter's having to
identify himself with the original reader, so Savigny ignores the tension
between the original and the present legal sense.84
   It has emerged clearly enough in the course of time that this is a legally
untenable fiction. Ernst Forsthoff has shown in a valuable study that for
purely legal reasons it was necessary for an awareness of historical change
to develop, which involved distinguishing between the original meaning of
a law and that applied in current legal practice.85 It is true that the jurist is
always concerned with the law itself, but he determines its normative
content in regard to the given case to which it is to be applied. In order to
determine this content exactly, it is necessary to have historical knowledge
of the original meaning, and only for this reason does the judge concern
himself with the historical value that the law has through the act of
legislation. But he cannot let himself be bound by what, say, an account of
the parliamentary proceedings tells him about the intentions of those who
first passed the law. Rather, he has to take account of the change in
circumstances and hence define afresh the normative function of the
law.
   It is quite different with the legal historian. He is apparently concerned
only with the original meaning of the law, the way in which it was meant,
and the validity it had when it was first promulgated. But how can he
know this? Can he know it without being aware of the change in
circumstances that separates his own present time from that past time?
Must he not then do exactly the same thing as the judge does—i.e.,
distinguish between the original meaning of the text of the law and the
legal meaning which he as someone who lives in the present automatically
assumes? The hermeneutical situation of both the historian and the jurist
seems to me to be the same in that, when faced with any text, we have an
immediate expectation of meaning. There can be no such thing as a direct
access to the historical object that would objectively reveal its historical
value. The historian has to undertake the same reflection as the jurist.
   Thus the actual content of what is understood in each of the two ways
is the same. The above description of the historian's approach, then, is
inadequate. Historical knowledge can be gained only by seeing the past in

=== p. 323 ===

  its continuity with the present—which is exactly what the jurist does in his
  practical, normative work of "ensuring the unbroken continuance of law
  and preserving the tradition of the legal idea."86
     We must consider, though, whether the case we have been discussing is
  really characteristic of the general problem of historical understanding.
  The model from which we started was the understanding of a law still in
  force. Here the historian and the dogmatist were concerned with the same
  object. But is this not a special case? A legal historian who turns to the legal
  cultures of the past, and certainly any other historian who is seeking to
  understand a past that no longer has any direct continuity with the
  present, would not recognize himself in the case we have been considering—namely a law still in force. He would say that legal hermeneutics
  has a special dogmatic task that is quite foreign to the context of historical
  hermeneutics.
     In fact the situation seems to me just the opposite. Legal hermeneutics
  serves to remind us what the real procedure of the human sciences is. Here
  we have the model for the relationship between past and present that we
  are seeking. The judge who adapts the transmitted law to the needs of the
  present is undoubtedly seeking to perform a practical task, but his
  interpretation of the law is by no means merely for that reason an arbitrary
  revision. Here again, to understand and to interpret means to discover and
  recognize a valid meaning. The judge seeks to be in accord with the "legal
  idea" in mediating it with the present. This is, of course, a legal mediation.
  It is the legal significance of the law—and not the historical significance of
  the law's promulgation or of particular cases of its application—that he is
  trying to understand. Thus his orientation is not that of a historian, but he
  has an orientation to his own history, which is his present. Thus he can
  always approach as a historian those questions that he has implicitly
  concluded as a judge.
      On the other hand, the historian, who has no juridical task before him
  but is trying to discover the legal meaning of this law—like anything else
  that has been handed down in history—cannot disregard the fact that he
  is concerned with a legal creation that needs to be understood in a legal
  way. He must be able to think not only historically but also legally. It is true
  that it is a special case when a historian is examining a legal text that is still
  valid today. But this special case shows us what determines our relationship to any traditionary text. Trying to understand the law in terms of its
  historical origin, the historian cannot disregard its continuing effect: it
  presents him with the questions that he has to ask of historical tradition. Is

=== p. 324 ===

this not true of every text—i.e., that it must be understood in terms of
what it says? Does this not mean that it always needs to be restated? And
does not this restatement always take place through its being related to the
present? Inasmuch as the actual object of historical understanding is not
events but their "significance," it is clearly an incorrect description of this
understanding to speak of an object existing in itself and of the subject's
approach to it. The truth is that historical understanding always implies
that the tradition reaching us speaks into the present and must be
understood in this mediation—indeed, as this mediation. In reality then,
legal hermeneutics is no special case but is, on the contrary, capable of restoring the
hermeneutical problem to its full breadth and so re-establishing the former unity of
hermeneutics, in which jurist and theologian meet the philologist.
   We saw above87 that one of the conditions of understanding in the
human sciences is belonging to tradition. Let us now try to verify this by
seeing how this structural element of understanding obtains in the case of
legal and theological hermeneutics. This condition is clearly not so much a
limiting condition as one that makes understanding possible. The way the
interpreter belongs to his text is like the way the point from which we are
to view a picture belongs to its perspective. It is not a matter of looking for
this viewpoint and adopting it as one's standpoint. The interpreter similarly
finds his point of view already given, and does not choose it arbitrarily.
Thus it is an essential condition of the possibility of legal hermeneutics that
the law is binding on all members of the community in the same way.
Where this is not the case—for example in an absolutist state, where the
will of the absolute ruler is above the law—hermeneutics cannot exist,
"since an absolute ruler can explain his words in a sense that abrogates the
general rules of interpretation."88 For in this instance the law is not
interpreted in such a way that the particular case is decided justly
according to the right sense of the law. On the contrary, the will of a
monarch who is not bound by the law can effect whatever seems just to
him without regard for the law—that is, without the effort of interpretation. The need to understand and interpret arises only when something is enacted in such a way that it is, as enacted, irrevocable and
binding.
   The work of interpretation is to concretize the law in each specific
case89—i.e., it is a work of application. The creative supplementing of the
law that is involved is a task reserved to the judge, but he is subject to the
law in the same way as is every other member of the community. It is part
of the idea of a rule of law that the judge's judgment does not proceed from

=== p. 325 ===

  an arbitrary and unpredictable decision, but from the just weighing up of
  the whole. Anyone who has immersed himself in the particular situation
  is capable of undertaking this just weighing-up. This is why in a state
  governed by law, there is legal certainty—i.e., it is in principle possible to
  know what the exact situation is. Every lawyer and every counsel is able,
  in principle, to give correct advice—i.e., he can accurately predict the
  judge's decision on the basis of the existing laws. Applying the law is not
  simply a matter of knowing the law. If one has to give a legal judgment on
  a particular case, of course it is necessary to know the law and all the
  elements that have determined it. But the only belonging under the law
  necessary here is that the legal order is recognized as valid for everyone
  and that no one is exempt from it. Hence it is always possible to grasp the
  existing legal order as such—i.e., to assimilate dogmatically any past
  supplement to the law. Consequently there is an essential connection
  between legal hermeneutics and legal dogmatics, and in it hermeneutics
  has the more important place. For the idea of a perfect legal dogmatics,
  which would make every judgment a mere act of subsumption, is
  untenable.90
     Let us now consider the case of theological hermeneutics, as developed by
  Protestant theology, as it applies to our question.91 Here there is a genuine
  parallel to legal hermeneutics, for here too dogmatics cannot claim any
  primacy. The proclamation is genuinely concretized in preaching, as is the
  legal order in judgment. But there is still a big difference between them.
  Unlike a legal verdict, preaching is not a creative supplement to the text it
  is interpreting. Hence the gospel acquires no new content in being
  preached that could be compared with the power of the judge's verdict to
  supplement the law. It is not the case that the gospel of salvation becomes
  more clearly determined only through the preacher's thoughts. As a
  preacher, he does not speak before the community with the same dogmatic
  authority that a judge does. Certainly preaching too is concerned with
  interpreting a valid truth, but this truth is proclamation; and whether it is
  successful or not is not decided by the ideas of the preacher, but by the
  power of the word itself, which can call men to repentance even though
  the sermon is a bad one. The proclamation cannot be detached from its
  fulfillment. The dogmatic establishment of pure doctrine is a secondary
  matter. Scripture is the word of God, and that means it has an absolute
  priority over the doctrine of those who interpret it.
     Interpretation should never overlook this. Even as the scholarly interpretation of the theologian, it must never forget that Scripture is the divine

=== p. 326 ===

proclamation of salvation. Understanding it, therefore, cannot simply be a
scientific or scholarly exploration of its meaning. Bultmann once wrote,
"The interpretation of the biblical writings is subject to exactly the same
conditions as any other literature."92 But the meaning of this statement is
ambiguous, for the question is whether all literature is not subject to
conditions of understanding other than those formal general ones that
have to be fulfilled in regard to every text. Bultmann himself points out
that all understanding presumes a living relationship between the interpreter and the text, his previous connection with the subject matter it deals
with. He calls this hermeneutical requirement fore-understanding, because it
is clearly not something to be attained through the process of understanding but is already presupposed. Thus Hofmann, whom Bultmann
quotes with approval, writes that scriptural hermeneutics presupposes a
relationship to the content of the Bible.
   We may ask, however, what kind of "presupposition" this is. Is it
something that is given with human life itself? Does there exist in every
man a prior connection with the truth of divine revelation because man as
such is concerned with the question of God? Or must we say that it is first
from God—i.e., from faith—that human existence experiences itself as
being affected by the question of God? But then the sense of the
presupposition implied in the concept of fore-understanding becomes
questionable. For then the presupposition would not be valid universally
but only from the viewpoint of true faith.
   In regard to the Old Testament this is a venerable hermeneutical
problem. Which is the right interpretation of it, the Jewish one or the
Christian one in light of the New Testament? Or are both legitimate
interpretations—i.e., do they have something in common, and is this what
is really being understood by the interpreter? The Jew who understands
the text of the Old Testament in a different way than the Christian shares
with him the presupposition that he too is concerned with the question of
God. At the same time, he will hold that a Christian theologian misunderstands the Old Testament if he takes its truths as qualified by the New
Testament. Hence the presupposition that one is moved by the question of
God already involves a claim to knowledge concerning the true God and
his revelation. Even unbelief is defined in terms of the faith that is
demanded of one. The existential fore-understanding from which Bult-mann starts can only be a Christian one.
   We could perhaps try to escape this conclusion by saying that it is
enough to know that religious texts are to be understood only as texts that

=== p. 327 ===

  answer the question of God. There need be no claim on the religious
  commitment of the interpreter himself. But what would a Marxist, who
  understands religious utterances only as the reflection of class interests,
  say? He will not accept the presupposition that human existence as such is
  moved by the question of God. This presupposition is obviously held only
  by someone who already recognizes the alternative of belief or unbelief in
  the true God. Thus the hermeneutical significance of fore-understanding
  in theology seems itself theological. After all, the history of hermeneutics
  shows how the examination of the texts is determined by a very precise
  fore-understanding. As a Protestant art of interpreting Scripture, modern
  hermeneutics is clearly related in a polemical way to the dogmatic tradition
  of the Catholic church. It has itself a dogmatic denominational significance.
  This does not mean that such theological hermeneutics is dogmatically
  predisposed, so that it reads out of the text what it has put into it. Rather,
  it really risks itself. But it assumes that the word of Scripture addresses us
  and that only the person who allows himself to be addressed—whether he
  believes or doubts—understands. Hence the primary thing is application.
     We can, then, distinguish what is truly common to all forms of
  hermeneutics: the meaning to be understood is concretized and fully
  realized only in interpretation, but the interpretive activity considers itself
  wholly bound by the meaning of the text. Neither jurist nor theologian
  regards the work of application as making free with the text.
     The task of concretizing something universal and applying it to oneself
  seems, however, to have a very different function in the historical sciences.
  If we ask what application means here and how it occurs in the kind of
  understanding undertaken in the human sciences, we can acknowledge
  that a certain class of traditionary material is applied in the same way the
  jurist does in regard to the law and the theologian the proclamation. Just
  as in the one case the judge seeks to dispense justice and in the other the
  preacher to proclaim salvation, and as, in both, the meaning of what is
  proclaimed finds its fullest realization in the proclamation of justice and
  the proclamation of the gospel, so in the case of a philosophical text or a
  work of literature we can see that these texts require a special activity of
  the reader and interpreter, and that we do not have the freedom to adopt
  a historical distance toward them. It will be seen that here understanding
  always involves applying the meaning understood.
      But does application essentially and necessarily belong to understanding? From the point of view of modern science the answer will be that it
   does not, and it will be said that the kind of application that makes the

=== p. 328 ===

interpreter the person to whom the text was originally addressed, as it
were, is quite unscientific and is to be wholly excluded from the historical
sciences. What makes modern scholarship scientific is precisely the fact
that it objectifies tradition and methodically eliminates the influence of the
interpreter and his time on understanding. It may often be difficult to
attain this goal, and it will be difficult to preserve the distinction between
historical and dogmatic interest in the case of texts that are addressed to no
one in particular and claim to be valid for anyone who receives the
tradition. A good example of this is the problem of scientific theology and
its relation to the tradition of Scripture. It may seem in this case that the
balance between historico-scientific and dogmatic interpretation is to be
found in the private world of the person. It may be the same with the
philosopher and also with our aesthetic consciousness when it finds itself
addressed by a work of art. But according to this view, science claims to
remain independent of all subjective applications by reason of its
method.
   This is the kind of argument that would have to be presented by
proponents of the modern theory of science. Those cases in which the
interpreter cannot immediately substitute for the original addressee will be
considered exemplary—i.e., where a text has a quite specific addressee,
such as the partner to an agreement, or the recipient of a bill or an order.
Here, to understand the meaning of the text fully, we must, as it were, put
ourselves in the place of the addressee, and insofar as this transposition
serves to give the text its full concrete form, we can regard this also as an
achievement of interpretation. But this transposing of ourselves into the
position of the original reader (Schleiermacher) is something quite different from application. It actually skips the task of mediating between then
and now, between the Thou and the I, which is what we mean by
application and which legal hermeneutics also regards as its task.
   Let us take the example of understanding an order. An order exists only
where there is someone to obey it. Here, then, understanding belongs to a
relationship between persons, one of whom has to give the order. To
understand the order means to apply it to the specific situation to which it
pertains. It is true that one makes the other repeat the order to make sure
it has been understood, but that does not alter the fact that it is given its
real meaning when it is carried out and concretized in accordance with its
meaning. This is why there is such a thing as an explicit refusal to obey that
is not simply disobedience but derives from the meaning of the order and
its concretization. A person who refuses to obey an order has understood

=== p. 329 ===

      it, and because he applies it to the situation and knows what obedience
      would mean in that situation, he refuses. The criterion of understanding is
      clearly not in the order's actual words, nor in the mind of the person giving
      the order, but solely in the understanding of the situation and in the
      responsible behavior of the person who obeys. Even when an order is
      written down so one can be sure it will be correctly understood and
      executed, no one assumes that it makes everything explicit. The comic
      situation in which orders are carried out literally but not according to their
      meaning is well known. Thus there is no doubt that the recipient of an
      order must perform a definite creative act in understanding its meaning.
         If we now imagine a historian who regards a traditionary text as such an
      order and seeks to understand it, he is, of course, in a situation quite
      different from that of the original addressee. He is not the person to whom
      the order is addressed and so cannot relate it to himself. But if he really
      wants to understand the order, then he must, idealiter, perform the same act
      as that performed by the intended recipient of the order. The latter too,
      who applies the order to himself, is well able to distinguish between
      understanding and obeying an order. It is possible for him not to obey even
      when—indeed, precisely when—he has understood it. It may be difficult
      for the historian to reconstruct the original situation in which the order
      arose. But he will understand it fully only when he has thus made the
      order concrete. This, then, is the clear hermeneutical demand: to understand a text in terms of the specific situation in which it was written.
         According to the self-understanding of science, then, it can make no
      difference to the historian whether a text was addressed to a particular
      person or was intended "to belong to all ages." The general requirement of
      hermeneutics is, rather, that every text must be understood according to
      the aim appropriate to it. But this means that historical scholarship first
      seeks to understand every text in its own terms and does not accept the
      content of what it says as true, but leaves it undecided. Understanding is
      certainly concretization, but one that involves keeping a hermeneutical
      distance. Understanding is possible only if one keeps oneself out of play.
      This is the demand of science.
         According to this self-interpretation of the methodology of the human
      sciences, it is generally said that the interpreter imagines an addressee for
      every text, whether expressly addressed by the text or not. This addressee
      is in every case the original reader, and the interpreter knows that this is
      a different person from himself. This is obvious, when thus negatively
      expressed. A person trying to understand a text, whether literary critic or

=== p. 330 ===

historian, does not, at any rate, apply what it says to himself. He is simply
trying to understand what the author is saying, and if he is simply trying
to understand, he is not interested in the objective truth of what is said as
such, not even if the text itself claims to teach truth. On this the philologist
and the historian are in agreement.
   Hermeneutics and historical study, however, are clearly not the same
thing. By examining the methodological differences between the two, we
will discover that what they really have in common is not what they are
generally thought to have. The historian has a different orientation to the
texts of the past, in that he is trying to discover something about the past
through them. He therefore uses other traditionary material to supplement
and verify what the texts say. He considers it as more or less of a weakness
when the philologist regards his text as a work of art. A work of art is a
whole, self-sufficient world. But the interest of the historian knows no
such self-sufficiency. Against Schleiermacher, Dilthey once said, "Philology
would like to see self-contained existence everywhere."93 If a work of
literature from the past makes an impression on a historian, this will have
no hermeneutical significance for him. It is fundamentally impossible for
him to regard himself as the addressee of the text and accept its claim on
him. Rather, he examines the text to find something it is not, of itself,
attempting to provide. This is true even of traditionary material which
itself purports to be historical representation. Even the writer of history is
subject to historical critique.
   Thus the historian goes beyond hermeneutics, and the idea of interpretation acquires a new and more defined meaning. It no longer refers
only to the explicit act of understanding a given text, as for the philologist.
The concept of historical interpretation corresponds more to the idea of
the expression, which is not understood by historical hermeneutics in its
classical and traditional sense—i.e., as a rhetorical term that refers to the
relation of language to thought. What the expression expresses is not
merely what is supposed to be expressed in it—what is meant by it—
but primarily what is also expressed by the words without its being
intended—i.e., what the expression, as it were, "betrays." In this wider
sense the word "expression" refers to far more than linguistic expression;
rather, it includes everything that we have to get behind, and that at the
same time enables us to get behind it. Interpretation here, then, does not
refer to the sense intended, but to the sense that is hidden and has to be
disclosed. In this sense every text not only presents an intelligible meaning
but, in many respects, needs to be interpreted. The text is primarily a

=== p. 331 ===

      phenomenon of expression. It is understandable that the historian is
      interested in this aspect. For the documentary value of, say, a report
      depends in part on what the text, as a phenomenon of expression, displays.
      From this, one can discover what the writer intended without saying, what
      party he belonged to, with what views he approached things, or even what
      degree of lack of principle or dishonesty is to be expected of him. These
      subjective elements affecting the credibility of the witness must be taken
      into consideration. But, above all, the content of the traditionary material
      must itself be interpreted, even if its subjective reliability is established—i.e., the text is understood as a document whose true meaning can be
      discovered only behind its literal meaning, by comparing it with other data
      that allow us to estimate its historical value.
         Thus for the historian it is a basic principle that tradition is to be interpreted in
      a sense different than the texts, of themselves, call for. He will always go back
      behind them and the meaning they express to inquire into the reality they
      express involuntarily. Texts must be treated in the same way as other
      available historical material—i.e., as the so-called relics of the past. Like
      everything else, they need explication—i.e., to be understood in terms of
      not only what they say but what they exemplify.
         The concept of interpretation reaches its culmination here. Interpretation is necessary where the meaning of a text cannot be immediately
      understood. It is necessary wherever one is not prepared to trust what a
      phenomenon immediately presents to us. The psychologist interprets in
      this way by not accepting the expressions of life in their intended sense but
      delving back into what was taking place in the unconscious. Similarly, the
      historian interprets the data of tradition in order to discover the true
      meaning that is expressed and, at the same time, hidden in them.
         Thus there is a natural tension between the historian and the philologist
      who seeks to understand a text for the sake of its beauty and its truth. The
      historian's interpretation is concerned with something that is not
      expressed in the text itself and need have nothing to do with the intended
      meaning of the text. There is a fundamental conflict here between the
      historical and the literary consciousness, although this tension scarcely
      exists now that historical consciousness has also altered the orientation of
      the critic. He has given up the claim that his texts have a normative validity
      for him. He no longer regards them as models of the best that has been
      thought and said, but looks at them in a way that they themselves did not
      intend to be looked at; he looks at them as a historian. This has made
      philology and criticism subsidiary disciplines of historical studies. This

=== p. 332 ===

could be glimpsed already in classical philology when it began to call itself
the science of antiquity (Wilamowitz). It is a department of historical
research concerned primarily with language and literature. The philologist
is a historian, in that he discovers a historical dimension in his literary
sources. Understanding, then, is for him a matter of placing a given text in
the context of the history of language, literary form, style, and so on, and
thus ultimately mediating it with the whole context of historical life. Only
occasionally does his own original nature come through. Thus, in judging
the ancient historians, he tends to give these great writers more credence
than the historian finds justified. This ideological credulity, which makes
the philologist overestimate the value of his texts as evidence, is the last
vestige of his old claim to be the friend of "eloquence" and the mediator of
classical literature.
   Let us now inquire whether this description of the procedure of the
human sciences, in which the historian and the critic of today are one, is
accurate and whether the claim of historical consciousness to be universal
is justified. In regard to philology it seems questionable.94 The critic is
ultimately mistaking his own nature, as a friend of eloquence, if he bows
to the standard of historical studies. If his texts possess an exemplary
character for him, this may be primarily in regard to form. The older
humanism fervently believed that everything in classical literature was
said in an exemplary way; but what is said in such a way is actually more
than an exemplar of form. Eloquence (schone Reden) is not called such
simply because what is said is said beautifully, but also because something
beautiful is said. It seeks to be more than mere rhetoric. It is particularly
true of the national poetic traditions that we admire not only their poetic
power, the imagination and art of their expression, but above all the great
truth that speaks in them.
   If in the work of the critic, then, there is still something of only
acknowledging models, he is not in fact relating his texts merely to a
reconstructed addressee but also to himself (though he is unwilling to
accept this). But in accepting models there is always an understanding that
does not leave their exemplarity undecided, but rather has already chosen
and considers itself obligated to them. That is why relating oneself to an
exemplar is always like following in someone's footsteps. And just as this
is more than mere imitation, so this understanding is a continually new
form of encounter and has itself the character of an event precisely because
it does not simply leave things up in the air but involves application. The

=== p. 333 ===

  literary critic, as it were, weaves a little further on the great tapestry of
  tradition that supports us.
     If we acknowledge this, then criticism and philology can attain their true
  dignity and proper knowledge of themselves only by being liberated from
  history. Yet this seems to me to be only half the truth. Rather, we should
  ask whether the picture of the historical approach, as set out here, is not
  itself distorted. Perhaps not only the approach of the critic and philologist
  but also that of the historian should be oriented not so much to the
  methodological ideal of the natural sciences as to the model offered us by
  legal and theological hermeneutics. It may be that the historical approach
  to texts differs specifically from the original bond of the critic to his texts.
  It may be that the historian tries to get behind the texts in order to force
  them to yield information that they do not intend, and are unable of
  themselves to give. With regard to the individual text, this would seem to
  be the case. The historian approaches his texts the way an investigating
  magistrate approaches his witnesses. But simply establishing facts, elicited
  from possibly prejudiced witnesses, does not make the historian. What
  makes the historian is understanding the significance of what he finds.
  Thus the testimony of history is like that given before a court. It is no
  accident that in German the same word is used for both, Zeugnis
   (testimony; witness). In both cases testimony aids in establishing the facts.
  But the facts are not the real objects of inquiry; they are simply material for
  the real tasks of the judge and of the historian—that is, respectively, to
  reach a just decision and to establish the historical significance of an event
  within the totality of his historical self-consciousness.
      Thus the whole difference is possibly only a question of the criteria. One
  should not choose too nicely if one would reach the essentials. We have
  already shown that traditional hermeneutics artificially limited the dimensions of the phenomenon, and perhaps the same is true of the historical
  approach. Is it not the case here too that the really important things
  precede any application of historical methods? A historical hermeneutics
  that does not make the nature of the historical question the central thing, and
  does not inquire into a historian's motives in examining historical material,
  lacks its most important element.
      If we accept this, then the relation between literary criticism and
  historical studies suddenly appears quite different. Although we spoke of
  the humanities as being under the alien control of historical studies, this is
  not the last word on the matter. Rather, it seems to me that the problem of
   application, of which we had to remind the critic, also characterizes the more

=== p. 334 ===

complicated situation of historical understanding. All appearances seem to be
against this, it is true, for historical understanding seems to fall entirely
short of the traditionary text's claim to applicability. We have seen that
history does not regard a text in terms of the text's intention but in terms
of its own characteristic and different intention—i.e., as a historical
source—using it to understand what the text did not at all intend to say but
we nevertheless find expressed in it.
   On closer examination, however, the question arises whether the
historian's understanding is really different in structure from the critic's. It
is true that he considers the texts from another point of view, but this
difference of intention applies only to the individual text as such. For the
historian, however, the individual text makes up, together with other
sources and testimonies, the unity of the whole tradition. The whole
unified tradition is his true hermeneutical object. It is this that he must
understand in the same sense in which the literary critic understands his
text in the unity of its meaning. Thus the historian too must perform a task
of application. This is the important point: historical understanding proves
to be a kind of literary criticism writ large.
   But this does not mean that we share the hermeneutical approach of the
historical school, the problems of which we outlined above. We spoke of
the dominance of the philological schema in historical self-understanding
and used Dilthey's foundation of the human sciences to show that the
historical school's aim of seeing history as reality and not simply as
unfolding complexes of ideas could not be achieved. We, for our part, are
not maintaining, with Dilthey, that every event is as perfectly meaningful
as a text. When I called history criticism writ large, this did not mean that
historical studies are to be understood as part of intellectual history
 (Geistesgeschichte).
   I am saying just the opposite. We have seen, I think more correctly, what
is involved in reading a text. Of course the reader before whose eyes the
great book of world history simply lies open does not exist. But neither
does the reader exist who, when he has his text before him, simply reads
what is there. Rather, all reading involves application, so that a person
reading a text is himself part of the meaning he apprehends. He belongs to
the text that he is reading. The line of meaning that the text manifests to
him as he reads it always and necessarily breaks off in an open indeterminacy. He can, indeed he must, accept the fact that future generations will
understand differently what he has read in the text. And what is true of
every reader is also true of the historian. The historian is concerned with

