=== chunk: eemeren-grootendorst-2004-systematic-theory/ch3-critical-discussion-model ===
title: A Model of a Critical Discussion (four-stage dialectical model)
source_pdf: docs/sources/eemeren-grootendorst-2004-systematic-theory/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 52-78
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 42
plan_page_end: 68
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 42 ===

                A Model of a Critical Discussion

                 Classical roots of argumentation studies
Like research in many other disciplines, the study of argumentation
goes back to classical antiquity. Unlike in most other disciplines, however, knowledge of the ancient literature remains in argumentation
theory a necessary condition for a proper exercise of the profession.
Certain theoretical insights formulated by classical authors, such as
Aristotle and Cicero, still belong to the core of argumentation theory.
They are an integral part of the foundations of the hermeneutic and
critical tools that are currently available for the analysis and evaluation
of argumentative discourse and texts.1
    After the Sophists had for a long time taught all kinds of argumentative skills, the theoretical interest in argumentation crystallized in
Greek antiquity in syllogistic logic (which was then called analytica),
dialectic (dialectica), and rhetoric (rhetorica). For Aristotle, logic was
concerned with analytical arguments in which the truth of the premises
is evident. Dialectic represented the art of regulated debate, and was
treated in the Topica (Topics) and De sophisticis elenchis (On Sophistical
Refutations).2 Rhetoric, the art of persuading an audience, is discussed
by Aristotle in the Rhetorica (On Rhetoric).3

1 See Van Eemeren and Houtlosser (1999, 2000, 2002a, b), but also Schiappa (2002),

  Goodwin (2002), Kauffeld (2002), and Jacobs (2002).
2 See Aristotle (1928c) and (1928d). See also Krabbe (2002).
3 See Aristotle (1928a, b, c, d, 1991). See also Hohmann (2002).

=== p. 43 ===

    In his logic, Aristotle distinguishes between two kinds of arguments:
deductive syllogisms and inductive syllogisms.4 Both kinds of syllogisms are also used in dialectical arguments, but the premises of the
argument are in dialectic always statements that are not evidently true
but are generally accepted – as Aristotle says, statements that are acceptable to “the wise or at least the majority of them.” In rhetorical
arguments, the premises need only be plausible for the audience that
is to be convinced. Deductive and inductive syllogisms are among the
means one can use to confer the plausibility of the premises on the
conclusion that is to be drawn.
    For Aristotle, dialectics is about conducting a critical discussion
that is dialectical because a systematic interaction takes place between
moves for and against a particular thesis.5 In the Topics, he offers a survey of possible attacks, accompanied by warnings to the defender. In
particular, Aristotle provides tips on how to elicit the right concessions
from the other party. These concessions play a crucial role in the dialectical system: The attacker uses them to lead the defender to make a
statement that contradicts what he has said earlier. If this happens, the
attacker has won the discussion, just as when he manages to elicit an
untruth or a paradox from the defender, or when the defender commits grammatical blunders or keeps on repeating himself. By making use of certain – sometimes extremely refined – argumentative
techniques, the attacker may attempt to disguise what he is aiming at.
    Rhetoric is about the most suitable means to convince a specific
audience. As Leff (2002: 55) observes, “Rhetoric is the faculty of observing in any given case the available means of persuasion.” Aristotle
distinguishes between “extrinsic” persuasive devices, which draw on
existing material such as laws or documents, and “intrinsic” persuasive
devices, which depend on the inventive skills of the speaker. The three
intrinsic rhetorical devices are logos, ethos, and pathos.6 The speaker

4 Classical logic deals primarily with deductive syllogisms with categorical propositions.

  In an inductive syllogism, a general conclusion is drawn from specific cases.
5 The term dialectical originally referred to the use of a specific technique of argumen-

  tation in a debate: Start from the opponent’s thesis and derive a contradiction from
  it, so that the thesis can be refuted. This technique, which exists in different variants,
  is nowadays usually called reductio ad absurdum or indirect proof.
6 Argumentation theoreticians concentrate on logos. For ethos and pathos, see, for

  example, Wisse (1989).

=== p. 44 ===

who appeals to logos may use a deductive rhetorical syllogism, which
in principle has the form of an enthymeme, or an inductive rhetorical
syllogism that consists of examples designed to make a generalization
plausible.7 The premises of a rhetorical syllogism must be plausible to
the audience. Aristotle groups the various kinds of rhetorical points of
departure for an argumentation by the degree to which the premises
are acceptable to the audience that is to be won over; this acceptability can vary from absolute certainty to plausibility or premises whose
acceptability is just fortuitous.
    Greek rhetoric was the basis for the development of the more elaborate Roman rhetorical system as it finds its expression in the first century b.c. in the Rhetorica ad Herennium ([Cicero], 1954), in Cicero’s De
inventione (1949) and De oratore (1942), and much later in Quintilian’s
Institutio oratoria (Quintilianus 1920).8 In Roman rhetoric, the distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic persuasive devices was maintained,
as was the distinction between logos, ethos, and pathos.9 The enthymeme
and the use of examples still counted as the rational persuasive devices.
In the epicheireme, several new elements were added in Roman rhetoric
to the enthymeme: Besides the minor premise (assumptio) – adduced
as an accepted point of departure – the major premise (propositio) –
functioning as the justificatory principle – and the conclusion (complexio), the epicheireme includes the approbatio assumptionis, which
supports the accepted point of departure, and the approbatio propo-sitionis, which supports the justificatory principle.10

                       New rhetorics and new dialectics
Without going in more detail into the history of the rise and fall of
dialectic and rhetoric, and their continuing competition, we note that

7 An enthymeme is, according to most definitions, a syllogism in which the premises

   are plausible starting points for the audience and one premise is usually implicit.
   Cf. Kraus (2002).
 8 See Rhetoric ad Herennium ([Cicero], 1954), Cicero (1942, 1949) and Quintilianus

   (1920). A fundamental difference between Greek and Roman rhetoric is that
   Aristotle’s general moves can be applied to any subject at all. In Roman rhetoric,
   the moves are primarily subject-bound.
 9 The Romans seem to have had a greater predilection for ethos and pathos than Aristotle

   displayed.
10 By means of the system of loci or (special) rhetorical moves, the theory of inventio is

   an aid in choosing the premises that are to “fill out” the epicheireme.

=== p. 45 ===

for a very long time there was little interest in the theoretical study
of argumentation in ordinary language. At the beginning of the nineteenth century, especially in the United States, there was a clear revival
in the interest in rhetoric, accompanied by a reappraisal. That reappraisal of rhetoric connected primarily with the demand for practical
applications.11 Since the second half of the nineteenth century, North
American schools and universities have taught courses on writing and
public speaking inspired by classical rhetoric.12 By now, there are many
books of the “classical rhetoric for the modern student” type, and there
are whole series of manuals with instructions for debating, discussing,
and holding meetings based on rhetorical insights.13 The revival of the
practical interest in argumentation is also clear in manuals on logic
and “critical thinking,” which bear traces of the influence of classical
logic and dialectic. Almost every modern manual of logic has a section
on informal logic that focuses on the practical application of logical
insights.14
   Argumentation theory did not receive any new theoretical impulses
until the 1950s, thanks to the publications of philosophers such as
Arne Naess, Stephen Toulmin, Chaı̈m Perelman, and the less well-known Rupert Crawshay-Williams.15 By far the greatest influence –
after they had at first been criticized or ignored – was exerted by two
books that were published in 1958: Toulmin’s The Uses of Argument
and La nouvelle rhétorique: traité de l’argumentation by Perelman and
Lucie Olbrechts-Tyteca.16 The model of the argumentation process

11 The classical rhetorical doctrine of status exerted a great influence on the develop-

   ment of the academic debate, by which argumentative skills are practiced in North
   American universities.
12 Nowadays these courses are usually provided by departments of (speech) communi-

   cation that have specialized in communication and rhetoric. See Kinneavy (1971).
13 A very well-known example of the first category is Corbett (1966). See further the

   bibliographies by Cleary and Haberman (eds., 1964) and Kruger (1975).
14 See, for example, Copi (1972), Kahane (1973), and Rescher (1975). Generally

   speaking, the content of the “informal” parts is completely separate from the treatment of modern formal logic in the rest of the book. The “application” of logical insights is usually confined to the “translation” of argumentation from ordinary
   language to a logical standard form.
15 For a survey of the main insights they have advanced, see van Eemeren et al. (1996:

   Chapters 3, 4, 5).
16 Johnstone, who was the first to provide a survey of the state of the art in modern

   argumentation theory (1968), was right in pointing out that the reappraisal of the
   study of argumentation among philosophers is primarily due to the work of these
   scholars.

=== p. 46 ===

presented in The Uses of Argument has (sometimes in an amended form)
a prominent position as an analytical instrument in the study of argumentation in various practical domains, such as law, politics, policy,
and ethics. La nouvelle rhétorique initially played a role mainly in philosophical discussions of rationality and reasonableness, but after the
appearance of an English translation in 1969, also in practical fields
such as law and communication. In spite of the new élan that these
two studies undoubtedly gave to argumentation studies, neither the
theoretical approach of Toulmin nor that of Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca marks a real break with the classical tradition in argumentation
theory. Both approaches also display dialectical traits, but they can
both, despite all of the differences between them, be placed in the
rhetorical tradition without much difficulty.
   The construction of Toulmin’s model is based on what Toulmin
sees as the rationality of legal procedures. In his view, argumentative
discussions in other areas proceed in an analogous fashion. Toulmin’s
model comes down to a schematic diagram of the procedural form of
argumentation, which is in his view the same in all areas (or “fields”)
of argumentation. In the model, several fixed elements play a role.
Facts (data) are adduced in support of a standpoint (claim). The data
are linked with the claim by means of a, usually implicit, justification
(warrant). In principle, the warrant is a general rule that serves to justify
the step from the data to the claim.17 If necessary, the warrant can in
turn be backed up by an additional statement (backing). Toulmin’s
basic model is as follows:

                                Data                    Claim

                                          Warrant

                                          Backing

17 In practice, it is often difficult (if not impossible) to determine whether a certain

     part of the argumentation belongs to the data or whether it should be regarded as
     warrant. This problem is partly due to the fact that Toulmin’s definition of a warrant
     combines two different properties – having a rule-like character and being implicit –
     that need not go together. In ordinary communication, it is usually the part of the
     argumentation that is regarded as already familiar that is left implicit, irrespective of
     whether it is factual or rule-like.

=== p. 47 ===

The soundness (or argumentative validity) of an argumentation is determined, according to Toulmin, by the degree to which the warrant
is made acceptable by a backing. The kind of backing that is required
depends on the kind of topic that is the subject of the argument. That
is why the criteria for evaluating the argumentation are, in Toulmin’s
view, “field-dependent.”18 If this means that an argumentation has to
be evaluated by experts in the field concerned, the consequence is
that different kinds of (reasonable) critics are needed to evaluate the
soundness of argumentation in different fields. By following this approach, Toulmin turns his back on the universal notion of “formal
validity” from modern logic. In his view, formal validity is a validity criterion that is only applicable to analytical arguments, which are rare
in practice.
    At first sight, Toulmin seems to set argumentation in the dialectical
context of a critical discussion between a speaker and a listener, but
on closer inspection, his approach turns out to be rhetorical. By comparison with a rhetorical source such as Cicero’s De inventione immediately reveals (1949: I, xxxiv, 58–59), Toulmin’s model actually boils
down to a rhetorical expansion of the syllogism similar to the classical epicheireme. Although the reactions of others are anticipated, the
model is primarily directed at representing the argumentation for the
standpoint of the speaker or writer who advances the argumentation.
The other party remains in fact passive: The acceptability of the claim
is not made dependent on a systematic weighing up of arguments for
and against the claim.
    The “New Rhetoric” of Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca is an attempt
to describe argumentation techniques that people use in practice to
win the approval of others for their standpoints. The norm of reasonableness that has to be applied in evaluating argumentation lies
with the audience: Argumentation is considered sound (or argumentatively valid) if it is successful in influencing the audience for which
it is intended. The new rhetoric offers a description of different kinds
of audiences. Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca distinguish between a
“specific” audience that consists of actual people whom the speaker or
writer addresses in a particular case, and a “universal” audience that
is the representation of reasonableness. The premises on which an

18 Contrary to what is suggested by Johnstone (1968), Toulmin’s model does not provide

  any usable criteria for a critical evaluation of argumentation.

=== p. 48 ===

argumentation is based are also further categorized. On top of that,
the two authors list the (types of ) argument schemes that they consider appropriate to convince an audience. In this connection, it is
important to note that argumentation that is successful with a specific
audience need not necessarily be convincing for the universal audience.19 Whether or not this is the case also depends on how exactly
the universal audience is conceived.
   Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca claim that by constituting an argumentation theory that complements formal logic, their New Rhetoric
creates a framework for “non-analytical thought.” By formal logic, however, they do not refer to modern logic, but to the classical apodictic
ideal of knowledge in which statements are taken to represent “true
knowledge” only if their truth is evident or if they can be logically
derived from statements that are evidently true. Although Perelman
and Olbrechts-Tyteca claim to be building on classical dialectic, they
prefer to call their theory the “New Rhetoric” to avoid confusion – in
particular with the Marxist use of the term “dialectical.” In fact, the
communicative form of the dialogue that is essential for Aristotelian dialectic does not play any role at all in Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca’s
New Rhetoric.20 We think that the label New Rhetoric is also more
appropriate because Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca give dialectic (if
one views their theory in this light) an extremely strong rhetorical
turn, to say the least, by concentrating entirely on how people change
other people’s minds. Their objective comes closest to the Aristotelian
notion of rhetoric.
   There are indeed striking parallels between the “New” rhetoric as
proposed by Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca and the “Old,” classical

19 The concept of a universal audience is problematic. See, for example, Ray (1978),

   Scult (1985, 1989), Golden (1986), Crosswhite (1989), and Ede (1989). As every
   speaker or writer can have his or her own conception of the universal audience, in
   theory there may be as many universal audiences as there are speakers or writers. Cf.
   Wintgens (1993).
20 The dialectical criterion that a standpoint is acceptable as long as it withstands the

   systematic criticism of a critical opponent is simply ignored in the New Rhetoric.
   Apparently, Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca did not realize that dialectical chains of
   reasoning do have to be logically valid, and that this requirement has nothing to do
   with the epistemological status of the premises (which distinguishes classical logic
   from dialectics). There can be exactly the same logical relations between accepted
   or acceptable statements as between true statements.

=== p. 49 ===

theories of rhetoric. Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca’s classification of
the premises, for example, is the same as Aristotle’s. The classification
is in both cases directly linked to the degree to which the premises are
acceptable for the audience.21 Another parallel can be found in the
argument schemes that, according to the New Rhetoric, characterize
the link between the premises and the standpoint that is defended:

      Argumentation by association
        —Quasi-logical argumentation
        —Argumentation based on the structure of reality
        —Argumentation that grounds the structure of reality
      Argumentation by dissociation

Most of the argument schemes that are “based on the structure of
reality” can already be found in Book III of Aristotle’s Topics, and the
argument schemes that “ground the structure of reality” offer the same
opportunities for generalization as classical rhetorical induction does.
The distinction between the argument schemes based on the structure of reality and the argument schemes that ground the structure
of reality runs, in principle, parallel with Aristotle’s distinction between rhetorical syllogisms (enthymemes) and rhetorical induction
(examples).22
   Although Toulmin’s model of argumentation and Perelman and
Olbrechts-Tyteca’s New Rhetoric have been developed independently
of one another, in our view a clear connection can be discerned between the two theoretical approaches. This connection is somewhat
obscured by the different ways in which the authors present their proposals. Toulmin emphasizes that his model of analysis was developed
primarily to make it clear that the evaluation of argumentation is in
the last instance field-dependent and must be left to participants in
the field, while Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca opt for a descriptive
approach in which the success of the chosen starting points and argument schemes with the audience occupies pride of place. However,

21 In a rhetorical syllogism, the argument is based on topoi or loci with regard to accepted

   relations in reality (“what goes for the causes goes for the effects”: like father, like
   son).
22 The type of warrant that the Toulminians Ehninger and Brockriede (1963) call a

   causal relation, for instance, would in the New Rhetoric be viewed as a relation of
   succession based on the structure of reality.

=== p. 50 ===

if Toulmin’s model is given a rhetorical interpretation, it is not very
difficult to treat Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca’s argument schemes
(perhaps with the exception of quasi-logical argumentation) as descriptions of different kinds of warrants.23
   The insights provided by Toulmin’s model and by the descriptions
given in Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca’s New Rhetoric are not a sufficient basis for giving a justified evaluation of the way in which the
various argument schemes are used as a warrant. This is not even the
case if these insights were more elaborated, better systematized, and
more thoroughly tested than they now are. What this set of theoretical
instruments lacks is a normative dimension that does justice to dialectical considerations. A difference of opinion can only be resolved in
accordance with a critical philosophy of reasonableness, in the way we
explained, if a systematic discussion takes place between two parties
who reasonably weigh up the arguments for and against the standpoints at issue. This means that the set of theoretical instruments that
we need has to contain rules and procedures that indicate which moves
are admissible in a critical discussion.

The philosophers Arne Naess (1953, 1966) and Rupert Crawshay-Williams (1957) published their contributions to the study of argumentation in the same period as, or in fact even earlier than, Toulmin
and Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca. Their works are important steps
toward the development of a modern argumentation theory that is
more strongly related with the dialectical tradition. The semantic analysis of discussions by Naess and the analysis of differences of opinion
by Crawshay-Williams have been of great influence to the development
of argumentation theory. The insights developed by these two authors
are part of the philosophical basis of the dialectical approach to argumentation known as “formal dialectics” as proposed by Else Barth and
Erik Krabbe in From Axiom to Dialogue (1982).
   The theoretical foundations of Barth and Krabbe’s formal dialectics – the name stems from Hamblin (1970) – were laid in the dialogue
logic of the Erlangen School of Lorenzen and his associates.24 In From

23 Cf. Ehninger and Brockriede (1963).
24 For an introduction into dialogue logic, see Lorenzen and Lorenz (1978) and van

     Eemeren et al. (1996: 253–263).

=== p. 51 ===

Axiom to Dialogue, Barth and Krabbe develop formal procedures by
which it can be dialogically determined whether or not a thesis is logically defensible. In these procedures, the reasoning that takes place is
conceived as a dialogue between a proponent and an opponent of a
thesis, who join to examine whether the thesis can be successfully defended against critical attack. In defending the thesis, the proponent
may make use of the opponent’s concessions: statements for which the
opponent is prepared to assume responsibility. The proponent has to
counter every attack on one of his own statements. He can do so by
means of a direct attempt at defense or by means of a counterattack
on one of the opponent’s concessions. The opponent is obliged to
defend every concession that the proponent has attacked. The proponent tries to use the opponent’s concessions in such a way that the
latter ends up in a position in which the only possibility is to admit
to a statement that he had attacked earlier in the discussion. If the
proponent succeeds in achieving this, he has won the discussion. In
this case, he has managed to defend his thesis ex concessis – that is, on
the basis of the concessions made.25
   The formal dialectical theory of Barth and Krabbe, together with
critical rationalism as propagated by Popper (1972, 1974) and Albert
(1975), the theory of speech acts of Austin (1962) and Searle (1969,
1979), and Grice’s theory of rational verbal exchanges (1975, 1989)
have been the major sources of inspiration for developing our pragma-dialectical argumentation theory. We have expounded the principles
of this theory in Speech Acts in Argumentative Discussions (1984), in which
we presented an ideal model of a critical discussion. In Argumentation,
Communication, and Fallacies (1992), we further elaborated our theory,
in particular with regard to the fallacies. Reconstructing Argumentative
Discourse (1993), co-authored by Sally Jackson and Scott Jacobs, explains how argumentative discourse and texts can be analyzed with the
help of the pragma-dialectical method and some insight in the basic
principles and conventions of verbal communication. In this volume,
we continue our efforts.
   Ever since classical antiquity, the dialectical approach to argumentation has concentrated on the way in which standpoints can be

25 For a succinct explanation of formal dialectics, see van Eemeren et al. (1996: 263–

=== p. 52 ===

critically evaluated in an argumentative discussion. The purpose of
the discussion is to examine whether a difference of opinion about the
acceptability of a standpoint can be resolved by means of a regulated
exchange of ideas. In the pragma-dialectical approach to argumentation we have developed so far, the notion of a critical discussion plays
a crucial role. A critical discussion can be described as an exchange
of views in which the parties involved in a difference of opinion systematically try to determine whether the standpoint or standpoints at
issue are defensible in the light of critical doubt or objections. Unlike, for instance, formal dialectics, our approach to argumentation
is not only dialectical, but also pragmatic. The pragmatic dimension
of our approach manifests itself primarily in the fact that the moves
that can be made in a discussion aimed at resolving a difference of
opinion are conceived as verbal activities (“speech acts”), carried out
within the framework of a specific form of oral or written language use
(“speech event”), in a context of interaction that takes place against
a specific cultural-historical background. This means that our dialectical approach to argumentation is part of the study of verbal communication also known as “discourse analysis.” In accordance with the
tradition that has developed in linguistics to refer to the study of language use in its broadest sense by means of the label of “pragmatics,”
we have expressed our theoretical position in naming our approach
to argumentation pragma-dialectics.

              Meta-theoretical principles of pragma-dialectics
The pragma-dialectical investigations start from four meta-theoretical
principles, which have certain methodological consequences.26 Using
these meta-theoretical principles as our point of departure, we have
laid the foundation for integrating the normative and the descriptive
dimensions of the study of argumentation. We did so by “functionalizing,” “externalizing,” “socializing,” and “dialectifying” in our investigations the various components of argumentative discourse and
texts that constitute the subject-matter of the study of argumentation.
Functionalization means that we treat every language activity as a

26 For a justification of these meta-theoretical principles, see van Eemeren, Grooten-

     dorst, Jackson, and Jacobs (1993: 13–15) and van Eemeren et al. (1996: ch. 10).

=== p. 53 ===

purposive act. Externalization means that we target the public
commitments entailed by the performance of certain language activities. Socialization means that we relate these commitments to the
interaction that takes place with other people through the language
activities in question. Finally, dialectification means that we regard the
language activities as part of an attempt to resolve a difference of opinion in accordance with critical norms of reasonableness. In our view,
only if these principles are taken as methodological guidelines can
an argumentation theory be developed that provides a suitable framework for the analysis and evaluation of argumentative discourse and
texts. 27
    Let us begin our explanatory comments on these methodological
guidelines by re-emphasizing the pragma-dialectical view that argumentation is an attempt to overcome doubt regarding the acceptability of a standpoint or criticism of a standpoint. The structural
characterizations that are given in various formal and informal approaches of argumentation can certainly be enlightening, but they
are inadequate as a point of departure because they are not motivated by the functional raison d’être of argumentative language use.
Argumentation is adduced in reaction to, or in anticipation of, a difference of opinion, and serves a role in the regulation of disagreement. Not only the need for argumentation, but also its internal and
external structure and the criteria that it must meet, are directly related to the doubt or criticism that the argumentation is intended to
remove. In principle, the argumentation is attuned to handling the
difference of opinion in a specific way – that is, a way that results in
the acceptance of the arguer’s standpoint by the addressee. This is
why argumentative language use in the pragma-dialectical approach
is viewed as a purposive activity that is, theoretically speaking, just as
its structural design, determined by its function in the regulation of
disagreement.28

27 For a more elaborate exposition of the meta-theoretical principles on which the

   pragma-dialectical theory of argumentation is based, see van Eemeren and Grooten-dorst (1984: 4–18).
28 Unlike in both formal and informal logical approaches to argumentation, the focus

   in pragma-dialectics is on the way in which language is used, or should be used, in
   argumentative practice to achieve communicational and interactional goals. For the
   descriptive dimension, see also Anscombre and Ducrot (1983).

=== p. 54 ===

    Functionalization of the research object in pragma-dialectics is
achieved by regarding the verbal expressions used in argumentative
discourse and texts as speech acts and specifying the conditions for identity and correctness that apply to the performance of these speech acts.
An analysis of the speech acts that are performed in the discourse or
text makes it possible to determine exactly what is at stake at a particular juncture. The specification of the conditions for identity and
correctness that apply to the speech acts that have been performed
makes it clear what “disagreement space” there is in a certain case
and how the arguer responds to the disagreement in the performance
of the (complex) speech act argumentation.29 In the case of utterances
whose function is unclear, with the help of the speech act conditions,
an analysis can be given that makes it possible to determine which communicative and interactional purposes these utterances are supposed
to serve in resolving the difference of opinion.
    Of course, a person may have all kinds of motives for adopting, questioning, rejecting, defending, or attacking a particular standpoint in a
particular manner, but the only thing that person can really be held to
is what he or she has, whether directly or indirectly, said or written.30
That is why it is not the internal reasoning processes and inner convictions of those involved in resolving a difference of opinion that are of
primary importance to argumentation theory, but the positions these
people express or project in their speech acts. Instead of concentrating on the psychological dispositions of the language users involved in
the resolution process, we concentrate primarily on their commitments,
as they are externalized in, or can be externalized from, the discourse
or text.
    Externalization of commitments is in pragma-dialectics achieved
by investigating exactly which obligations are created by (explicitly
or implicitly) performing certain speech acts in a specific context
of an argumentative discourse or text. In this way, terms such as
“accept” and “disagree” take on a “material” sense: They do not primarily stand for being in a certain state of mind, but for undertaking public

29 The term disagreement space was introduced by Jackson (1992: 261).
30 In our view, this principle holds for all speech acts. It may of course be important

     for certain purposes to have psychological insight into the difference between what
     is expressed in the speaker’s or writer’s use of language and his unrevealed motives,
     but that is another matter.

=== p. 55 ===

commitments that are assumed in a context of disagreement and can
be externalized from the discourse or text. “Acceptance,” for example, can be externalized as the expression of a positive commitment
to a proposition that is under discussion.31 And “disagreement” can
be externalized from the discourse or text as the expression by two
different parties of commitments to speech acts that are opposed to
one another and seem irreconcilable. On the basis of these externalizations, the state of “being convinced” can be externalized as the
expression of acceptance of a positive commitment to a speech act by
a person who was initially opposed to that speech act.32
    Argumentation is not just the expression of an individual assessment, but a contribution to a communication process between persons
or groups who exchange ideas with one another in order to resolve a
difference of opinion. Some approaches to argumentative discourse
and texts abstract from the way in which the communication process
is conducted, and certain components of the argumentative discourse
or text are just distinguished as, for instance, “major premises” and
“minor premises,” irrespective of the communication process they are
part of.33 In pragma-dialectics, argumentative discourse and texts are
conceived as basically social activities, and the way in which the argumentation is analyzed depends on the kind of verbal interaction
that takes place between the participants in this communication process. The ways in which the parties involved react to one another’s
(genuine or assumed) standpoints, doubt, criticism, argumentation,
and objections are regarded as a vital part of a joint process of conflict
regulation.34

31 Pragma-dialectics does not speculate on the effectiveness of argumentation on the

   basis of supposed psychological dispositions, but psychological research may provide
   interesting explanations.
32 For a description of the perlocutionary act of convincing and its relation to the

   illocutionary act of advancing argumentation, see van Eemeren and Grootendorst
   (1984: 47–74) and Jacobs (1987: 231–233).
33 Cf. Wenzel (1980), who distinguishes between approaches to argumentation accord-

   ing to whether the argumentation is viewed as a process, a product, or a procedure.
   The logical approaches concentrate traditionally on the product, and in particular
   the validity of the deductions of conclusions from premises.
34 Toulmin seems inclined to view argumentation as a social process, because in his

   model every part of the argumentation is seen as a reaction to a possible challenge
   or query. The questions that Toulmin associates with the different parts (“What do
   you have to go on?” and so on) do indeed serve to explain the structure of the

=== p. 56 ===

   Socialization of the research object is in pragma-dialectics achieved
by distinguishing between the different roles played in the interaction
by the people involved in the argumentative exchange of views, and by
regarding the speech acts performed in this exchange as parts of an
argumentative dialogue between these two parties. The roles that are
played in this dialogue are linked to the positions that the parties have
adopted with regard to the difference of opinion. In the communication process, the participants involved in the dialogue can be held
to their speech acts, and have a certain justificatory obligation toward
these speech acts. The commitments that are created by the adoption
of a particular position are activated by the interactional context. It is
the stage in the resolution process in which a speech act is performed
and the interactional function that it can fulfill in this context that
determine to a large extent the meaning that is to be attributed to the
speech act. Therefore, the interactional context plays an important
role in identifying the various contributions that are made to the resolution of a difference of opinion in an argumentative exchange of
views.
   Of course, argumentation is only the appropriate way to resolve
a difference of opinion if it is in principle possible to overcome the
doubts or criticisms of a person who reacts in a way that can be expected
of a critical antagonist. This means that the approach to argumentative
discourse and texts that is chosen must do justice to the norms and
criteria that, in view of the resolution of a difference of opinion, have
to be imposed on language use, and cannot be restricted to a description of argumentative practice. In order to determine to what extent
an argumentative exchange is really conducive to the resolution of
a difference of opinion, certain standards are required by which the
quality of the argumentative language use can be measured. In order
to establish these standards, and to determine whether they have been
met, pragma-dialectics starts out from a model of a critical discussion
attuned to the resolution of a difference of opinion.35

   argument, but they do not result in a dialogical perspective. Neither does Perelman
   and Olbrechts-Tyteca’s notion of a universal audience introduce a real socialization:
   There is no need for a genuine exchange of views between two parties in a difference
   of opinion.
35 In Barth and Krabbe’s terms (1982: 21–22), a model (or part of a model) that is ide-

   ally suited for the resolution of a difference of opinion may be said to have optimal

=== p. 57 ===

   Dialectification of the research object is achieved in pragma-dialectics by regarding the speech acts performed in an argumentative exchange as speech acts that should be performed in accordance
with the rules that are to be observed in a critical discussion aimed at
resolving a difference of opinion. 36 These rules imply a methodical
regulation of argumentative discourse and texts. Together, the rules
combine to constitute a dialectical discussion procedure. This discussion procedure systematically indicates the structure of the process of
resolving a difference of opinion, and it specifies the speech acts that
play a role in the various stages of the resolution process.

       Dialectical stages in the process of resolving a difference
We have drawn up a model of a critical discussion to make clear what
is implied by the pragma-dialectical approach to argumentative language use as a means of resolving a difference of opinion.37 This
model provides a specification of the different stages that must be
distinguished in the process of the resolution of a difference of opinion and the different types of verbal moves that have a constructive
function in the different stages of the resolution process. The model
is based on the premise that a difference of opinion is only resolved
when the parties involved in the difference have reached agreement
on the question of whether the standpoints at issue are acceptable or

   problem-solving validity. If the model (or part of the model) is acceptable to the parties to the difference of opinion, the model is also “intersubjectively valid” or (when
   the parties have explicitly accepted it) “conventionally valid” or (when the parties
   have implicitly accepted it) “semi-conventionally valid.” We shall not differentiate
   between conventionality and semi-conventionality because in practice explicit agreements will be rare, and it is ordinary usage to call implicit agreements “conventions.”
36 According to Wenzel, argumentation in the dialectical approach is regarded as the

   “systematic management of discourse for the purpose of achieving critical decisions”
   (1979: 84). The purpose of the dialectical approach is to determine how discussions
   that are aimed at scrutinizing the acceptability of standpoints should be conducted.
   The standards provided by the model of a critical discussion make it possible to
   investigate systematically in what respects argumentative practice differs from the
   critical ideal.
37 A critical discussion reflects the Socratic ideal of subjecting everything one believes in

   to a dialectical scrutiny: not only statements of a factual kind, but also value judgments
   and normative standpoints (see Albert 1975). Assuming, in a Popperean vein, the
   fallibility of all human thought and action, the principle of a critical scrutiny is the
   guiding methodological principle.

=== p. 58 ===

not.38 This means that one party has to be convinced by the argumentation of the other party of the admissibility of that party’s standpoint,
or that the other party retracts his standpoint because he realizes that
his argument cannot stand up to the criticism. The resolution of a
difference of opinion is not the same as the settlement of a dispute.
A dispute is settled when, by mutual consent, the difference of opinion has in one way or another been ended – for example, by taking
a vote or by the intervention of an outside party who acts as a judge
or arbitrator. Of course, reaching a settlement does not mean that the
difference of opinion has really been resolved. A difference of opinion
is only resolved if a joint conclusion is reached on the acceptability of
the standpoints at issue on the basis of a regulated and unimpaired
exchange of arguments and criticism.
    In a critical discussion, the parties involved in a difference of opinion attempt to resolve this difference of opinion by achieving agreement on the acceptability or unacceptability of the standpoint(s) involved through the conduct of a regulated exchange of views. By following a dialectical procedure, the protagonist of a standpoint and the
antagonist attempt to achieve clarity as to whether the protagonist’s
standpoint can be defended in light of the antagonist’s critical reactions. Unlike most logical approaches, the dialectical procedure for
conducting critical discussion is not concerned only with the formal
relations between the premises and the conclusions of the arguments
that are used in the argumentation, but with every speech act in the
discourse or text that plays a role in investigating the acceptability of
standpoints.
    The model of a critical discussion performs both a heuristic and
a critical function in the analysis and evaluation of argumentative

38 Dialectical approaches to argumentation place a lot of emphasis on the need for

     consistency. In accordance with Popper’s critical rationalism, the scrutiny of statements is generally equivalent to the tracing of contradictions, because if two contradictory statements are maintained, at least one of them has to be retracted
     (Albert 1967/1975: 44). For an illustration of this principle, see Barth and Krabbe’s
     (1982) formal dialectics. Barth and Krabbe propose a dialectical method to determine whether a thesis is tenable by investigating whether upholding of the thesis
     leads to contradictions. The discussion procedure proposed in pragma-dialectics
     corresponds to this principle, albeit that the emphasis is on “pragmatic” inconsistencies rather than on logical contradictions (van Eemeren and Grootendorst 1984:
     169). See, further, Chapter 6 of this volume.

=== p. 59 ===

discourse and texts. The heuristic function is that of being a guideline for the analysis: The model serves as a guide in the detection and
theoretical interpretation of every element in, and aspect of, the discourse or text that is relevant to a critical evaluation.39 The critical
function is that of serving as a standard in the evaluation: The model
provides a series of norms by which it can be determined in what
respects an argumentative exchange of ideas diverges from the procedure that is the most conducive to the resolution of a difference of
    The pragma-dialectical argumentation theory assumes that, in principle, argumentative language use is always part of an exchange of views
between two parties that do not hold the same opinion, even when the
exchange of views takes place by way of a monologue. The monologue
is then taken to be a specific kind of critical discussion where the protagonist is speaking (or writing) and the role of the antagonist remains
implicit. Even if the role of the antagonist is not actively and explicitly
performed, the discourse of the protagonist can still be analyzed as a
contribution to a critical discussion: The protagonist makes an attempt
to counter (potential) doubt or criticism of a specific or non-specific
audience or readership.

Analytically, four stages can be distinguished in the process of resolving a difference of opinion that the participants in an argumentative
exchange of views have to pass through to arrive at a resolution of a
difference of opinion. These stages – which we call the discussion stages
of a critical discussion – are the “confrontation” stage, the “opening”
stage, the “argumentation” stage, and the “concluding” stage.40 In

39 In the case of more or less institutionalized linguistic activities, such as legal pro-

   cedures, scientific treatises, policy documents, and political debates, the guidance
   offered by the model of a critical discussion is supplemented by specific and well-motivated expectations regarding the structure of the discourse or text and the
   relevant speech acts it contains. Those expectations are derived from knowledge of
   the text genre and the formal and informal conventions that are in force. See, for an
   overview of the study of legal argumentation, Feteris (1999). More-detailed insight
   into conventions of language use, and into the role of the verbal and non-verbal context and the role of general and specific background knowledge, are also important.
   See also Chapter 5 of this volume.
40 The discussion stages distinguished in a dialectical approach overlap to some extent

   with the various stages that are generally distinguished in a rhetorical approach
   (exordium, narratio, argumentatio, peroratio), but the rationale of the distinctions is

=== p. 60 ===

argumentative practice, the four stages need not always be explicitly
passed through, let alone in one time in full and in the most appropriate order, but a difference of opinion can only be resolved in a
reasonable way if each stage of the resolution process is properly dealt
with, whether explicitly or implicitly.
   In the confrontation stage of a critical discussion, it becomes clear
that there is a standpoint that is not accepted because it runs up
against doubt or contradiction, thereby establishing a (“non-mixed”
or “mixed”) difference of opinion. The difference of opinion can also
pertain to more than one standpoint (and is then to be characterized
as “multiple”). The difference of opinion can be expressed explicitly,
but in practice it may well remain implicit. In the latter case, it is either assumed in the argumentative exchange of views that a difference
of opinion exists or the possibility of a difference of opinion is anticipated. Without such a real or presumed confrontation, there is no
need for a critical discussion.
   In the opening stage, the parties to the difference of opinion try to
find out how much relevant common ground they share (as to the
discussion format, background knowledge, values, and so on) in order to be able to determine whether their procedural and substantive “zone of agreement” is sufficiently broad to conduct a fruitful
discussion. There is no point in venturing to resolve a difference
of opinion through an argumentative exchange of views if there is
no mutual commitment to a common starting point, which may include procedural commitments as well as substantive agreement. One
or more participants must at this stage be prepared to act as the
party that assumes the role of the protagonist and defends the standpoint at issue, while one or more others must be prepared to act
as the party that assumes the role of the antagonist and reacts critically to the standpoint and its defense.41 In a great many cases, the

   different. The rhetorical stages are considered to be instrumental in securing the
   agreement of the target audience, the dialectical stages, in resolving a difference of
41 The role of antagonist of a standpoint may coincide with that of protagonist of

   a different (opposite) standpoint, but this is not necessarily the case: Entertaining
   doubt with regard to a standpoint does not automatically imply adopting a standpoint
   of one’s own. As soon as the discussion partner adopts the opposite standpoint, the
   difference of opinion becomes mixed.

=== p. 61 ===

opening stage of an argumentative exchange of views will remain
largely implicit, because it is generally tacitly assumed that the required
common ground exists. In practice, the opening stage corresponds to
those parts of the discourse in which the interlocutors manifest themselves as parties and determine whether there is a basis for a meaningful
exchange.
    In the argumentation stage, protagonists advance their arguments
for their standpoints that are intended to systematically overcome the
antagonist’s doubts or to refute the critical reactions given by the antagonist. The antagonists investigate whether they consider the argumentation that is advanced acceptable. If they consider the argumentation, or parts of it, not completely convincing, they provide further
reactions, which are followed by further argumentation by the protagonist, and so on. In this way, the structure of the argumentation a protagonist puts forward in the discourse can become very complicated:
This structure may, in fact, vary from extremely simple to extremely
complex.42 Although in practice, as a rule, parts of the argumentation stage remain implicit, there is only an argumentative discourse
if it is clear that argumentation is, in some way or other, advanced.
It is crucial for the resolution of a difference of opinion that argumentation is not only advanced, but also critically evaluated. Without
both these activities taking place, there can be no question of a critical
    The concluding stage of an argumentative exchange corresponds to
the stage of a critical discussion in which the parties establish what
the result is of an attempt to resolve a difference of opinion. The
difference of opinion can only be considered to be resolved if the
parties are, concerning each component of the difference of opinion,
in agreement that the protagonist’s standpoint is acceptable and the
antagonist’s doubt must be retracted, or that the standpoint of the
protagonist must be retracted. In the former case, the difference has
been resolved in favor of the protagonist; in the latter case, in favor

42 Because argumentation can be complex in different ways, different types of argumen-

   tation structures must be distinguished, ranging from “multiple” argumentation to
   “coordinatively compound” argumentation and “subordinatively compound” argumentation (see van Eemeren and Grootendorst 1992: 73–89 and Snoeck Henkemans

=== p. 62 ===

of the antagonist. In practice, it is usually only one of the parties that
puts the conclusion into words, but if the other party does not accept
this conclusion, no resolution has been achieved.
   When the concluding stage has been brought to an end, the argumentative exchange of views is over, but this naturally does not mean
that the same discussion partners cannot initiate a new discussion. The
parties may engage in a completely different difference of opinion, or
they may start a discussion about a more or less modified version of
the old difference, possibly with different premises in the opening
stage. The discussion roles of the participants may then have to change
too. In each of these cases, again, the same discussion stages – from
confrontation stage to concluding stage – have to be passed through
in order to arrive at a resolution of the (newly framed) difference of

                Pragmatic moves in the resolution process
The theory of speech acts is ideally suited to provide the theoretical
tools for dealing with verbal communication that is aimed at resolving a difference of opinion in accordance with the pragma-dialectical
principles. The various moves that are made in the different stages of
a critical discussion in order to arrive at a resolution of a difference of
opinion can be pragmatically characterized as speech acts. This makes
it possible to make clear which criteria the various pragmatic moves
must satisfy. Following the typology of speech acts that is still dominant in the theory of speech acts, we shall indicate which types of
speech acts can contribute to the resolution of a difference of opinion
in the various stages of a critical discussion.43 The typology developed
by Searle (1979) distinguishes between five types of speech acts, some
of which are directly relevant to a critical discussion, while others are
not. 44

43 Among the complications arising in practice are that many speech acts are only per-

   formed implicitly and that, besides assertives, other types of speech acts can function
   indirectly as a standpoint or argument. In such cases, a careful analytical reconstruction has to be carried out. See Chapters 4 and 5 of this volume.
44 For a more detailed presentation of this classification of speech acts, see Searle

   (1979).

=== p. 63 ===

    The first type of speech act that is to be distinguished consists
of the assertive speech acts, known for short as assertives. These are
the speech acts by which the speaker or writer “asserts” a proposition. In performing a speech act of this kind, a person commits himself more strongly or less strongly to the acceptability of a particular
proposition. The prototype of an assertive is an assertion in which
the speaker or writer, in effect, guarantees the truth of the proposition: “I assert that Chamberlain and Roosevelt never met.” Many
other assertives, however, do not pronounce the truth of a proposition, but express a judgment on its acceptability in a wider sense. In
such assertives, for example, the opinion of the speaker or writer is
given on the event or state of affairs that is expressed in the proposition: “In my opinion, no exceptions are possible to the freedom to
express one’s opinion,” “I think that Baudelaire is the best French
poet.”
    In principle, all assertives can occur in a critical discussion. They
may not only serve to express the standpoint that is under discussion, but may also form a part of the argumentation that is advanced
to defend that standpoint, or can be used to establish the result of
the discussion. 45 In drawing the conclusion, it can emerge that the
standpoint can be upheld. In that case, the standpoint may be repeated (“I uphold my standpoint”). It can also happen that the standpoint is to be retracted. Standpoints or arguments can be advanced
by assertions but also by other assertives such as statements, claims,

45 As we have explained in van Eemeren and Grootendorst (1984), argumentation can

  be described as a complex of communicative (“illocutionary”) speech acts at the
  sentence level that combine at a higher textual level in the complex speech act of
  argumentation. It is characteristic of argumentation that it is, at this higher textual
  level, connected with a speech act that expresses a point of view, or “standpoint.”
  The communicative force of a (complex) speech act does not depend exclusively on
  the formal properties of the verbal forms of expression that are used, but on their
  function in the context and situation concerned. This is why speech acts only form
  an argumentation if they are put forward in the context of a discussion of an issue
  that causes disagreement. In a different context, the same speech acts could function
  as an explanation or simply as a piece of information. For the felicity conditions of
  the (complex) speech act of argumentation, see van Eemeren and Grootendorst
  (1984); for the felicity conditions of advancing a standpoint, see Houtlosser (1994).
  For the distinction between “identity conditions” and “correctness conditions,” see
  van Eemeren and Grootendorst (1992: 30–33).

=== p. 64 ===

assurances, suppositions, and denials. The belief in a proposition
and the degree of commitment to the proposition expressed in a
standpoint or argument can vary from exceptionally strong, as in the
case of a firm assertion, to considerably weaker, as in the case of a
supposition.
    The second type of speech act consists of the directives. These are
speech acts by which the speaker or writer tries to get the listener or
reader to do something or to refrain from doing something, such as the
speech acts of requesting and prohibiting. The prototype of a directive
is an order, which requires a special position of the speaker or writer
vis-à-vis the listener or reader: “Come to my room” can only be an order
if the speaker is in a position of authority over the listener, otherwise
it is a request or an invitation. A question is a directive that is actually a
special form of request: It is a request to perform a verbal act – namely,
to reply. Other examples of directives are forbidding, recommending,
begging, and challenging.
    Not all directives play a constructive role in resolving a difference
of opinion. In a critical discussion, directives may serve to challenge
the party that has advanced a standpoint to defend that standpoint,
to request this party to provide argumentation in support of the
standpoint, or to request a party to provide a definition, an explanation, or some other usage declarative (see the discussion of the
fifth type of speech act). Directives such as orders and prohibitions,
if they are intended literally, are taboo in a critical discussion. Neither can the party that has advanced a standpoint be challenged to
do anything else other than provide argumentation for that standpoint – a challenge to a fight, for example, is not allowed in a critical
    The third type of speech act consists of the commissives. These are
speech acts in which the speaker or writer undertakes vis-à-vis the listener or reader to do something or to refrain from doing something.
Unlike in the case of a directive, in performing a commissive speech
act it is the speaker or writer, not the listener or reader, who is supposed to act. The prototype of a commissive is a promise, in which the
speaker or writer explicitly undertakes to do something or to refrain
from doing something: “I promise I won’t tell your father.” Accepting
and agreeing are also commissives. Of course, the speaker or writer

=== p. 65 ===

can also undertake a commitment about which the listener or reader
will be less enthusiastic: “I assure you that I shall show that your ideas
are not worthy of consideration.”
   Commisives can play different roles in a critical discussion: (1) accepting or not accepting a standpoint,46 (2) accepting the challenge
to defend a standpoint, (3) deciding to start a discussion, (4) agreeing
to assume the role of protagonist or antagonist, (5) agreeing to the
discussion rules, (6) accepting or not accepting argumentation, and –
when relevant – (7) deciding to start a new discussion. Some commis-sives, such as agreeing to discussion rules, can only be performed in
collaboration with the other party.
   The fourth type of speech act consists of the expressives. In speech
acts of this type, the speaker or writer expresses his feelings by congratulating or thanking someone, regretting something, and so on:
“My sincere congratulations on your appointment,” “Thank you for
your assistance,” “What a pity it didn’t go better.” There is no single
prototypical expressive. An expressive of joy might be “I’m glad to see
you’ve recovered,” hope is echoed in “I wish I could find such a nice
girl friend,” and irritation in “I’m fed up with your hanging around
here all day.”
   Expressives do not play a direct role in a critical discussion (but see
Chapter 5) because the mere expressing of emotions does not create
any commitments for the speaker or writer that are directly relevant
in the sense of being immediately instrumental in the resolution of a
difference of opinion. Of course, this does not mean that expressives
cannot have any positive or negative effect on the course of the resolution process. A person, for instance, who sighs that the discussion
will not get us anywhere or that she is unhappy with the discussion,
expresses an emotion that, contrary to contributing directly to the resolution of the difference of opinion, threatens to draw the attention
away from the resolution process, and this may in practice strongly
affect the further course of events.

46 As we explained in van Eemeren and Grootendorst (1984: 101, 152), the negative

  variants of the commissives are themselves strictly speaking to be regarded as as-sertives rather than commissives. For the sake of simplicity, we refrain in this volume
  from dealing in such a precise way with such “illocutionary negations.”

=== p. 66 ===

    The fifth type of speech act consists of the declaratives (or declarations). These are speech acts by means of which a particular state of
affairs is called into being by the speaker or writer, such as when the
chairperson says, “I open the meeting.” The very performance of a
declarative, provided that it takes place in the right circumstances,
creates a certain reality. When an employer addresses one of his employees with the words “You are fired,” he is not just describing a particular state of affairs, but his very words bring this state of affairs into
being. Declaratives are generally linked to institutionalized contexts,
such as official meetings and religious ceremonies, in which there is
no doubt as to who is authorized to perform the speech act in question. An important exception is formed by the sub-type we call usage
declaratives; these speech acts refer to linguistic usage and are not tied
to a specific institutional context (see van Eemeren and Grootendorst
1984: 109–112). The purpose of usage declaratives, such as definitions,
specifications, amplifications, and explanations, is to enlarge or facilitate the listener’s or reader’s understanding of other speech acts. The
speaker or writer performs them in a critical discussion to make clear
how a particular speech act is to be interpreted.
    With the exception of the usage declaratives, declaratives do not
play any immediate role in a critical discussion because they depend
on the authority of the speaker or writer in a particular institutional
context and do not directly contribute to the resolution of a difference of opinion. At best, the performance of a declarative may lead to
a settlement of a difference of opinion. Usage declaratives, however, can
perform a very useful function in a critical discussion. They enhance
the understanding of other relevant speech acts, and no special institutional relation is required for using them. Usage declaratives may occur
at any stage of the discussion, and in every stage of the discussion each
of the parties involved may be requested to perform a usage declarative. In the confrontation stage, for example, a usage declarative may
serve to unmask a spurious difference of opinion; in the opening stage,
a usage declarative may clarify a discussion rule or some vague part of
a premise; in the argumentation stage, a usage declarative may work
against premature acceptance or non-acceptance of an argument or a
standpoint; and in the concluding stage, a usage declarative may prevent arriving at a specious resolution. Usage declaratives can thus be

=== p. 67 ===

a helpful tool against the occurrence of a great variety of unnecessary
or unjustified discussion moves.

After this brief overview of which types of speech acts from the various categories of speech acts can play a constructive role in a critical
discussion, we can list them as follows:

Stage      Type of speech act and its role in the resolution

            ASSERTIVES
I           Expressing a standpoint
III         Advancing argumentation
IV          Upholding or retracting a standpoint
IV          Establishing the result

            COMMISSIVES
I           Acceptance or non-acceptance, upholding non-acceptance
            of a standpoint
II          Acceptance of the challenge to defend a standpoint
II          Decision to start a discussion; agreement on premises and
            discussion rules
III         Acceptance or non-acceptance of argumentation
IV          Acceptance or non-acceptance of a standpoint

            DIRECTIVES
II          Challenging to defend a standpoint
III         Requesting argumentation
I–IV        Requesting a usage declarative

            USAGE DECLARATIVES
I–IV        definition, specification, amplification, and so on.

The distribution of the different types of speech acts over the different
stages of the resolution process is described in the model of a critical
discussion. In the model, it is indicated, for each stage of the discussion,
which representative of a particular type of speech act plays a specific

=== p. 68 ===

constructive role in that stage of the discussion. This distribution is
summarized in the following table:

         table 3.1 Distribution of speech acts in a critical discussion

I                         Confrontation
Assertive                 Expressing a standpoint
Commissive                Acceptance or non-acceptance of a standpoint,
                            upholding non-acceptance of a standpoint
[Directive                Requesting a usage declarative]
[Usage declarative]       Definition, specification, amplification, etc.]

II                        Opening
Directive                 Challenging to defend a standpoint
Commissive                Acceptance of the challenge to defend a standpoint
                          Agreement on premises and discussion rules
                          Decision to start a discussion
[Directive                Requesting a usage declarative]
[Usage declarative]       Definition, specification, amplification, etc.]

III                       Argumentation
Directive                 Requesting argumentation
Assertive                 Advancing argumentation
Commissive                Acceptance or non-acceptance of argumentation
[Directive                Requesting a usage declarative]
[Usage declarative]       Definition, specification, amplification, etc.]

IV                        Concluding
Commissive                Acceptance or non-acceptance of a standpoint
Assertive                 Upholding or retracting a standpoint
                          Establishing the result of the discussion
[Directive                Requesting a usage declarative]
[Usage declarative]       Definition, specification, amplification, etc.]

