=== chunk: eemeren-grootendorst-2004-systematic-theory/ch6-ten-rules ===
title: Rules for a Critical Discussion (the ten rules)
source_pdf: docs/sources/eemeren-grootendorst-2004-systematic-theory/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 133-167
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 123
plan_page_end: 157
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 123 ===

                Rules for a Critical Discussion

             A critical-rationalistic view of reasonableness
Words like “rational” and “reasonable” are used in and out of season in ordinary language. It is often unclear exactly what they are
supposed to mean, and even if it is clear, the meaning is not always
consistent. An extra difficulty is that the senses in which these words
are used are not so precisely defined either. For ordinary usage, this
is usually not necessary, but if we are to use these terms technically,
we have to decide what they mean. This is particularly the case in the
study of argumentation, where a systematic attempt is made to indicate whether or not an argumentation is valid (in the informal sense
of problem valid and intersubjectively valid discussed in Chapter 2).
The terms reasonable and rational play a crucial role here, since the
evaluation of validity is put in the hands of a “rational critic who judges
reasonably.”1
   To start with the dictionary definitions, the Oxford English Dictionary
distinguishes the following meanings of “reasonable”:

   1.   Endowed with the faculty of reason; rational
   2.   In accordance with reason; not irrational or absurd
   3.   Proportionate
   4.   Having sound judgement; ready to listen to reason, sensible

1 Forthe role of a rational critic who judges reasonably, see Chapter 2 of this
 volume.

=== p. 124 ===

  5. Within the limits of reason; not greatly less or more than might
     be thought likely or appropriate; moderate; of a fair, average, or
     considerable amount, size, etc.
  6. Articulate
  7. Requiring the use of reason

The meanings “proportionate” (3), “articulate” (6), and “requiring
the use of reason” (7) are not so relevant here, nor is (5) in the sense
of “The weather was reasonable” or “My English is reasonable.” We
shall therefore limit our attention to the other meanings (described
in 1, 2, and 4).
   Excluding now obsolete meanings and those that are confined
to special disciplines such as physics and mathematics, the same
dictionary distinguishes the following meanings of the epithet
“rational”:

  1. Having the faculty of reasoning; endowed with reason
  2. Of, pertaining to, or based on reason or reasoning
  3. In accordance with reason; not foolish, absurd, or extreme.

   Leaving aside some subtle differences, clear correspondences can
be seen to exist between the relevant meanings of the word “reasonable,” on the one hand, and the word “rational,” on the other. The
main difference between “rational” and “reasonable” is generally that
between “the use of the faculty of reasoning” and “the sound use of the
faculty of reasoning.” In line with this, we shall use the term rational
for the use of the faculty of reasoning and the term reasonable for the
sound use of the faculty of reasoning. Although this terminology is
derived from ordinary language usage, at the same time we pin down,
in a regulatory fashion, the meanings of the two terms by stipulative
definitions. After all, the difference in meaning between the two words
in ordinary language is more diffuse, and the words are often used
interchangeably.
   By distinguishing in this way between rational and reasonable, we
adhere to a traditional philosophical distinction that is often indicated
by the German terms verständig and vernünftig. Unfortunately, even
many scientific writers sometimes confuse the meanings of Verstand
and Vernunft, but we shall try to distinguish consistently between rational in the sense of “based on reasoning” and reasonable in the sense

=== p. 125 ===

of “making sound use of the faculty of reasoning.”2 As we use these
terms, rationality is a necessary condition of reasonableness, but not
automatically a sufficient condition.3
    The question now is that of the exact content of reasonableness
in the sense of the sound use of reasoning. The process of scientific
research is often regarded as the paragon of reasonableness. Even
though it is pointed out nowadays that irrational elements play an
important role in devising scientific theories,4 many epistemologists
still regard the process of scientific research as the prototype of a
purposive rational discussion and the most pronounced form of a
reasonable exchange of ideas. It is therefore natural to begin to answer
our question by examining how philosophers of science who have
given much thought to it define reasonableness. This, however, proves
to raise more problems than one might have expected. We shall discuss
only a few of them that are most pertinent to us.
    Various philosophers of science who are concerned with research
methodology have tried to give the term reasonableness more substance
by indicating which rules and criteria must be observed in the resolution of a scientific problem. In doing so, they often assume that
the process of resolving a scientific problem can be regarded as conducting a scientific discussion. According to Habermas (1971), the
purpose of a scientific discussion of this kind is to arrive at intellectual
consensus.5 The rules that must be observed in a scientific discussion
are based on the conventions of scientific tradition and intersubjective
agreement. De Groot (1984) locates the reasonableness of the scientific method in the fact that an attempt is made to arrive at consensus
by means of argumentation in a critical discussion. The consensus
has to be reached in what de Groot calls the “forum” of scientists or
scholars. The problems that confront researchers cannot be resolved
by the application of precisely defined and infallible methodological

2 Cf. Perelman (1979: 117–123).
3 Reasonableness may, for instance, mean that in certain cases, not only verbal elements

  are to be taken into account, but also visual elements that play a part in the argumentation process, such as supporting images. Reasonableness may sometimes even include
  the incorporation of emotional factors in the analysis of an argumentative discourse
  or text.
4 See Kuhn (1962) and Feyerabend (1975).
5 For a useful overview in English of Habermas’s insights, see Habermas (1998).

=== p. 126 ===

rules and criteria, because such rules and criteria simply do not exist.
Of course, rules and criteria can be laid down to a certain point, but
they are never sufficient. According to de Groot, the researchers will
eventually still have to come up with arguments that are convincing
for the forum and arguments are convincing only if they satisfy the
idea of reasonableness shared by the scientific forum.
   It is regrettable that, according to de Groot, it is impossible to indicate precisely who belongs to the forum. Although in itself this looks
like a purely practical problem, it is in fact a major stumbling block
because the normative-theoretical construction of a forum implies total openness. All relevant experts must be enabled to take part in the
discussion, and a process of self-selection should guarantee the quality
of its participants. The identity of the members of this discussion community can be determined in practice only to a certain extent. Some
philosophers consider it necessary to distinguish between more than
one forum: Each forum is connected with a specific sort of scientific
problem or way of raising a question. In fact, a better way of solving
the problem of the membership of the scientific forum seems to be
to approach it from the opposite direction by first determining which
discussion rules apply and then examining which researchers observe
these rules.
   In taking this approach, the problem of reasonableness is, of course,
by no means solved. In modern philosophy of science, it is often
assumed that there is more than one scientific methodology. Many
oppose the suggestion that it is possible to draw up a single body
of methodological rules that is absolutely reasonable. Ideologically,
this suggestion is generally connected with a form of teleological
thinking that assumes that there is an objective scale of reasonableness with an absolute and final limit. These days, such speculations
are only rarely formulated by philosophers anymore, but instead it
is often too easily assumed that the problems are solved once they
are shifted from the methodological criteria and rules to the criteria for sound argumentation and the discussion rules of the forum. A glance at the study of argumentation is enough to make it
clear that shifting the problem in this way does not solve it just like
that. Philosophers of science who think otherwise have an exaggerated confidence in the problem-solving capacity of argumentation
theory.

=== p. 127 ===

   The situation is, in fact, rather complicated, because, on the other
hand, there are also philosophers of science who underestimate the
scope and range of argumentation theory. They have a parti pris that
a principal distinction must be made between descriptive and normative claims and that normative statements can never be the object of
a reasonable discussion. It is often thought that wishes, preferences,
and value judgments are based only on subjective preferences. By restricting reasonableness in this way, positivists and others adhering to
this view relegate discussions about wishes, preferences, and so on to
second place: They are discussions that do not satisfy the norm of
reasonableness. This limitation of the notion of reasonableness gives
free rein to those in politics, for example, who are not interested in
maintaining reasonableness. It even provides them with an alibi for not
using argumentation and immunizes their standpoints for criticism. In
our view, there is no a priori justification for pronouncing wishes, aims
and other choices of position that imply a value judgment unsuitable,
for a reasonable discussion.6 It is the task of argumentation theorists
to explain how in all these cases the general norm of reasonableness
can be satisfied in a critical discussion.

   Conceptions of reasonableness in the study of argumentation
The dominant conceptions of reasonableness in the study of argumentation can best be characterized on the basis of two older works
that, despite new ideas that have been developed in the last couple of
decades, have so far been most influential in this discipline: Toulmin’s
The Uses of Argument (1958) and Perelman’s and Olbrechts-Tyteca’s
La nouvelle rhétorique (1958).7 The conceptions of reasonableness espoused in both these works are immediately directed against formal

6 Our vision is not new. Apart from “cognitive reasonableness,” which is what scientists

  usually concentrate upon, the analytic tradition distinguishes also “desiderative reasonableness,” which bears on wishes, aims, and norms, and “practical reasonableness,”
  which relates to actions. Following in the philosophical footsteps of Popper, critical-rationalists have been emphasizing for years that any subject about which a critical
  discussion can be conducted lends itself to a reasonable treatment, irrespective of
  whether the difference concerns facts, ideas, judgments, attitudes, or actions.
7 For a fuller discussion of the works of Toulmin and Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca, see

  van Eemeren et al. (1996: chapter 5 and chapter 4, respectively). See also Chapter 2
  of this volume.

=== p. 128 ===

logic. These authors credit logicians – in Toulmin’s later terminology –
with a “geometrical” approach to reasonableness:

We ‘know’ something (in the full and strict sense of the term) if-and-only-if we
have a well-founded belief in it; our belief in it is well-founded if-and-only-if we can
produce good reasons in its support; and our reasons are really ‘good’ (by the
strictest philosophical standards) if-and-only-if we can produce a ‘conclusive’,
or formally-valid argument, linking that belief back to an unchallenged (and
preferably unchallengeable) starting point (1976:89).

From the fact that formal logicians apply a formal criterion of validity, it cannot be concluded, however, that they automatically share a
geometrical conception of reasonableness according to which the concept of “reasonableness” is only applicable to artificial arguments in a
formal argumentation. Logicians do not simply equate the soundness
of argumentation with the validity of the reasoning expressed in the
argumentation. Although they usually do not pay much attention to
this problem, some logicians, for example, emphasize the fact that the
argumentation must also be relevant to the point defended. Because
of their “formal orientation,” logicians nowadays concern themselves
only with the truth of the premises of an argument to the extent that
the truth of the premises structurally influences the validity of the argument. An argument is only logically valid if it has a form that rules
out the possibility that it has true premises and a false conclusion.
Logicians are not interested in “truth values” in themselves, let alone
that they jointly adhere to the epistemological ideal of the “Eternal
City of well-founded truth” that Toulmin holds to be characteristic of
the geometrical approach.
    Generally, neither do logicians opt for an “anthropological” approach to reasonableness, which implies that human knowledge is
produced just by following shared procedures on which there is a consensus in a particular community (see Chapter 2). On this view, the validity of arguments does not depend on the formal, quasi-geometrical
structure of the argument, but on this consensus. According to the
anthropological concept of reasonableness, the validity criterion is
determined on purely empirical grounds. In the past, it was not uncommon to regard logic as a descriptive science, but this conception has been in disgrace since Frege delivered his devastating critique of the psychological approach to logical principles as “laws of

=== p. 129 ===

thinking.”8 If one were to opt for an anthropological approach, one
of the extreme consequences would be that formal fallacies that
the discussants do not recognize as such must be regarded as valid
arguments.9
   There are also logicians – and we will follow them here – who prefer
to adopt a “critical” view of reasonableness by attributing value both
to the formal properties of arguments and to the shared knowledge
that is necessary to achieve consensus. If these two different aspects
are connected, it becomes possible to regard arguments as parts of
a functionally “formal” argumentative procedure that is “intersubjectively” acceptable. In the critical approach to reasonableness, there is
not only scrutiny of the effectiveness of the argumentative procedure,
but also reflection on the advantages and disadvantages of following
this procedure for the potential parties in a disagreement (Toulmin
1976: 207–261). Logicians who have a critical ideal of reasonableness
consider, just as Toulmin does, that a geometrical and an anthropological approach to argument eventually lead both to an impasse. In
the geometrical case, it results in skepticism; in the anthropological
case, in relativism. Logicians, however, usually give a somewhat different interpretation to “critical” than Toulmin. Unlike Toulmin, they
do not link arguments exclusively with the justification of standpoints.
Toulmin ignores the fact that logic can also be seen as a theory of
criticism.10

In both Toulmin’s model and the new rhetoric of Perelman and
Olbrechts-Tyteca, the soundness of argumentation, as is customary
in argumentation theory, is linked to specific judges, but they part
company when it comes to identifying these judges. Perelman and
Olbrechts-Tyteca regard argumentation as sound if its target audience
accepts it. They thereby choose a sociological perspective, and adopt
an anthropological norm of reasonableness, which implies that they ultimately equate the soundness of argumentation with its effectiveness
on those who act in a particular case as the judges. The consequence is

8 See Haack (1978: 238).
9 On the other hand, the anthropological approach does justice to factors that formal

   logic abstracts from, but that are all the same relevant to the evaluation of argumentation, such as the contextual circumstances in which the argumentation is advanced.
10 See Jarvie (1976: 329).

=== p. 130 ===

that argumentation that is sound in one case need not be sound in the
other case. The soundness of argumentation then depends essentially
on the evaluation criteria of a more or less arbitrary group of people,
who are selected by the speaker or writer. This means that the norm of
reasonableness is potentially relativistic to a high degree: Potentially,
there are as many kinds of reasonableness as there are judges – or even
more, if one bears in mind that judges may change their mind and in
the course of time come to apply other evaluation criteria. Perelman’s
introduction of the restriction that argumentation is only reasonable
when the “universal audience” considers it to be reasonable does in the
end not entail any restriction: Each individual is free to determine who
or what he considers to belong to the universal audience. Ultimately,
this boils down to the fact that whoever puts forward an argument can
also decide whether this argumentation is sound or not. After all, a
speaker or writer can always imagine a reasonable audience that follows the same norm of reasonableness, and declare that public to be
the universal audience.
    Toulmin’s model indicates less clearly which norm of reasonableness is applied. At any rate, this norm is not geometrical. In his later
books, Human Understanding (1972) and Knowing and Acting (1976),
Toulmin rejects both the geometrical and the anthropological conception of reasonableness, but in The Uses of Argument, first published
in 1958, his conception of reasonableness appears to have primarily
anthropological characteristics. Toulmin thinks that the soundness of
argumentation depends in the end on the specific evaluation criteria
of a particular group of people. Unlike in Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca’s case, this group is in Toulmin’s case not arbitrary: It comprises
representatives of the “field” – whatever this exactly means – to which
the argumentation in question belongs. In our view, there is a striking
resemblance between Toulmin’s group of judges and de Groot’s scientific forum. This is why it is all the more remarkable that Toulmin
later usually also uses the term forum to refer to his experts (Toulmin,
Rieke, and Janik 1979).
    The crucial role played by experts in a field is, according to Toulmin,
connected with the central position that is occupied in his model by
the “warrant,” the legitimizing of the step from the premises (“data”)
to the conclusion (“claim”). Only people who are familiar with the field
of argumentation concerned can decide whether the “backing” of the

=== p. 131 ===

warrant is sufficient in a particular case. It is this “field-dependent” evaluation that gives Toulmin’s conception of reasonableness a relativistic
character.11

                  A dialectical notion of reasonableness
A crucial objection that applies to both the geometrical and the anthropological norm of reasonableness is that they are both based on “justificationism”: Both approaches assume that reasonableness is concerned
exclusively with legitimizing standpoints definitively. Justificationism
of any kind, however, can never escape the so-called Münchhausen
trilemma, because in the last resort the justification has to choose from
the following three alternatives: (1) ending up in an infinite regress
of new justifications (regressus in infinitum); (2) going round in a circle
of mutually supporting arguments; (3) breaking off the justificatory
process at an arbitrary point. None of these three alternatives is really
satisfactory.12
    Justificationists generally adopt the last alternative. They usually
stop the process of justification at a certain point. The assertion where
the justification is broken off is then declared to be axiomatic or
is in some way or other elevated beyond further discussion. Sometimes, that assertion is retrospectively even raised to the status of a
premise because its truth is taken to be evident on the basis of intuition or experience. In this way, a premise is created that is immune
to criticism. It can function as an a priori truth or perhaps even as a
dogma.
    In our view, it is necessary to depart radically from the justifica-tionism of the geometrical and anthropological approaches to reasonableness and to replace these conceptions of reasonableness with a
different one. We do so by adopting the view of a critical rationalist
who proceeds on the basis of the fundamental fallibility of all human
thought. To critical rationalists, the idea of a systematic critical scrutiny
of all fields of human thought and activity is the principle that serves
as the starting point for the resolution of problems. In this approach,
conducting a critical discussion is made the point of departure for

11 See also Burleson (1979: 115).
12 See Albert (1975: 13).

=== p. 132 ===

the conception of reasonableness – which implies the adoption of a
dialectical approach. As we have indicated, argumentation in a dialectical approach is regarded as part of a procedure for resolving a
difference of opinion on the acceptability of one or more standpoints
by means of a critical discussion. In this procedure, a certain role
is played by critical insights from dialectics, by geometrical insights
from logic, and by anthropological insights from rhetoric. The reasonableness of the procedure is derived from the possibility it creates
to resolve differences of opinion (its problem validity) in combination
with its acceptability to the discussants (its conventional validity). In this
connection, the rules of discussion and argumentation developed in
a dialectical theory of argumentation must be scrutinized in terms
of both their problem-solving effectiveness and their intersubjective
acceptability.13
   The logical starting point that an assertion and its denial cannot
both be true at the same time has as consequence for the discussion
that one of the two assertions has to be withdrawn. Critical-rationalists
conclude from this predicament that the dialectical scrutiny of claims
in a critical discussion boils down to the exposure of (logical and pragmatic) inconsistencies. Barth and Krabbe (1982), for instance, have
developed a dialectical method for detecting logical contradictions.
Their method entails examining whether a particular thesis does not
lead to contractions with certain concessions – that is, is tenable in the
light of these concessions. If simultaneously maintaining the standpoint and the concessions leads to contradictions, either the standpoint or one or more of the concessions must be abandoned.14
   In Barth and Krabbe’s formal dialectical theory, a discussion situation is assumed that differs substantially from the discussion situation
that is normal in argumentative practice. The initial situation assumed
in the regulated dialogues of formal dialectics appears in attempts to
resolve a difference of opinion only in an argumentative discussion

13 See Barth and Krabbe (1982: 21–22). For an extensive empirical research project

   investigating the extent to which the pragma-dialectical procedure corresponds to
   the norms of reasonableness of ordinary discussants and can claim conventional
   validity, see van Eemeren, Meuffels, and Verburg (2000).
14 Strictly speaking, in the system of Barth and Krabbe contradictions are not ruled

   out. All that is prohibited is to call into question at a later stage an assertion that one
   advanced earlier in the discussion.

=== p. 133 ===

or text when the protagonist has advanced his arguments in defense
of a standpoint and then decides to check together with the antagonist
whether this standpoint is indeed tenable in the light of the arguments
that have been advanced. In fact, in such a case they are jointly examining if the standpoint is a conclusion that follows logically from the
arguments that serve as premises. The antagonist should then be prepared to assume the role of opponent and to add the protagonist’s
argumentation to his commitments. In ordinary discourse or texts,
this rather artificial situation will not so easily occur, though the discussion partners are naturally entirely free to add a scrutiny of this
kind if they want to.
   Because a theory of argumentation must, in our view, deal in the
first place with ordinary argumentative exchanges in ordinary language, in pragma-dialectics the general starting-point is a different
one: A speaker or writer advances a standpoint and acts as protagonist, and a listener or writer expresses doubt with regard to the standpoint and acts as antagonist. (If this antagonist advances the opposite
standpoint, the situation is already more complicated.) In a critical
discussion that proceeds in accordance with pragma-dialectical rules,
the protagonist and the antagonist try to find out whether the protagonist’s standpoint is capable of withstanding the antagonist’s criticism.
After the antagonist has expressed doubt or criticism, the protagonist puts forward argumentation in defense of the standpoint. If a
positive standpoint is defended, the protagonist attempts to justify
the proposition(s) expressed in the standpoint; if a negative standpoint is defended, the protagonist attempts to refute this proposition
(or these propositions). If there is reason to do so, in both cases the
antagonist reacts critically to the protagonist’s argumentation. If the
protagonist is confronted with new critical reactions on the part of
the antagonist, the attempts at legitimizing or refuting the standpoint
may be continued by putting forward new argumentation, to which
the antagonist can react in turn, and so on. The difference of opinion is resolved when the arguments advanced lead the antagonist to
accept the standpoint defended, or when the protagonist retracts his
standpoint as a consequence of the critical reactions of the antagonist. In this way, there is an interaction between the speech acts of
the protagonist and the speech acts of the antagonist that is typical
of the dialectical process of convincing in a critical discussion. This

=== p. 134 ===

interaction can, of course, only lead to the resolution of a difference
of opinion if it proceeds in an adequate fashion. This requires a regulation of the interaction that is in accordance with certain rules of
critical discussion. It is the task of dialectical argumentation theorists
to formulate these rules of critical discussion in such a way that together they constitute a problem-valid as well as a conventionally valid
discussion procedure.
   A procedure that promotes the resolution of differences of opinion cannot be exclusively confined to the logical relations by which
conclusions are inferred from premises. It must consist of a system of
regulations that cover all speech acts that need to be carried out in a
critical discussion to resolve a difference of opinion. This means that
the procedure should relate to all the stages that are to be distinguished
in a critical discussion aimed at resolving a difference of opinion: the
confrontation stage in which the difference of opinion is developed,
the opening stage in which the procedural and other starting points
are established, the argumentation stage in which the argumentation
is put forward and subjected to critical reaction, and the concluding
stage in which the outcome of the discussion is determined.
   Following our basic model of the distribution of speech acts in the
different stages of a critical discussion as described in Chapter 3, we
developed in Speech Acts in Argumentative Discussions (1984) a pragma-dialectical theory of argumentation that includes a discussion procedure that in our view satisfies the criterion of problem-validity. The
rules of procedure that apply to the different stages of a critical discussion are problem-valid because each of them makes a specific contribution to solving certain problems that are inherent in the various
stages of the process of resolving a difference of opinion.15 Of course,
the rules cannot offer any guarantee that discussants who abide by
these rules will always be able to resolve their differences of opinion.
They will not automatically constitute a sufficient condition for the
resolution of differences of opinion, but they are at any rate necessary
for achieving this purpose.

15 In fact, the pragma-dialectical rules aspire to comply with the more specific norms

  implicitly posed by Barth and Krabbe (1982) such as systematicity, realism, thoroughness, orderliness, and dynamism.

=== p. 135 ===

            The pragma-dialectical discussion procedure
The rules of the pragma-dialectical discussion procedure pertain to the
behavior of people who want to resolve their differences of opinion
by means of a critical discussion. Because we are here concerned with
deliberate behavior, or “acting,” for which the actors carry a certain
responsibility, the rules apply to the acts that the discussants perform.
In the externalized discussions we are concerned with, these acts consist primarily of speech acts. In Chapter 3, we have indicated which
speech acts may occur in the successive stages of a critical discussion.
For the sake of simplicity, we start in presenting our discussion procedure from a consistently non-mixed, single discussion, in which one
and no more than one standpoint is defended. The rules must specify
in which cases the performance of certain speech acts contributes to
the resolution of the difference of opinion. This makes it necessary to
indicate for each discussion stage when exactly the parties are entitled
to perform a particular kind of speech act, and if and when they are
even obliged to do so.
    In the confrontation stage of an argumentative discourse or text
dealing with a non-mixed, single difference, a standpoint is externalized (by discussant 1), and this standpoint is called into question
(by discussant 2). If there is no difference of opinion, there is nothing to resolve, and the argumentative discussion is superfluous. A
difference of opinion that is only partly externalized, or not externalized at all, does not make having a discussion superfluous, but
it does make it difficult. A dialectically regulated discussion, at any
rate, is ruled out. After all, rules for a critical discussion bear on the
speech acts performed by the discussants involved in the difference
and the ensuing commitments. The importance of the externalization of differences of opinion is therefore evident. One of the first
tasks in the formulation of rules for a critical discussion is thus to
promote an optimal externalization. This means that the discussants
must be able to put forward every standpoint and to call every standpoint into question. The guarantee that this is possible can be obtained by explicitly granting every discussant the unconditional right to
put forward or call into question every standpoint vis-à-vis every other
discussant.

=== p. 136 ===

In principle, standpoints are expressed by means of assertives. The fundamental ability to put forward or to call into question any standpoint
has the consequence that no special conditions apply to the propositional content of these assertives. The same is true of the propositional
content of the negation of the commissive with which a standpoint
is called into question. The unconditional right of discussants to put
forward standpoints and to call them into question also means that no
special preparatory conditions apply regarding the status or position of
the speaker or writer and the listener or reader. It is not the might
of the strongest that is decisive in a critical discussion, but the quality of
the argumentation and criticism.
    That differences of opinion may concern any standpoint and that
all discussants have the unconditional right to put forward or call into
question every standpoint is expressed in the following rule:

a. Special conditions apply neither to the propositional content of the assertives
by which a standpoint is expressed, nor to the propositional content of the negation of the commissive by means of which a standpoint is called into question.

b. In the performance of these assertives and negative commissives, no special
preparatory conditions apply to the position or status of the speaker or writer
and listener or reader.

Rule 1 applies to all the discussants who take part in a discussion.
By virtue of this rule, discussants themselves are not only entitled to
put forward and to call into doubt any standpoint, but they may also
in no way prevent other discussants from doing the same either. It
is perhaps superfluous to point out that rule 1 gives the discussants
an unconditional right, but does not impose any obligation on them.
Generally speaking, it is advisable to make use of the rights granted
by virtue of rule 1. Anyone who wants a difference of opinion to be
resolved will have to cooperate on the externalization of that difference.
   A consequence of the unconditional rights that are granted the
discussants under rule 1 is, for example, that a discussant who has just
lost a discussion in which he defended a particular standpoint against
another discussant reserves the right to put forward the same standpoint

=== p. 137 ===

to the same discussant again. This even applies to a discussant who has
first successfully defended a particular standpoint and then proceeds
to call it into question or to defend the opposite standpoint. Of course,
it is debatable whether the other discussant will be prepared to begin a
new discussion with such an idiosyncratic or unpredictable discussant,
and also whether it is reasonable to expect him to do so. We shall return
to the latter question in discussing the rules of the opening stage.

In the opening stage, after discussant 1 has accepted discussant 2’s challenge to defend his standpoint, the discussants decide to hold a discussion, and they come to agreements on the allocation of roles and
the discussion rules. The rules for a critical discussion must indicate
when discussant 2 is entitled to challenge discussant 1, when discussant 1 is obliged to take up this challenge, who assumes the role of the
protagonist, who assumes the role of the antagonist, what the shared
premises are, which rules apply in the argumentation stage, and how the
discussion is to be concluded in the concluding stage.

The right to challenge
We propose to grant the right to challenge a discussant to defend
his standpoint unconditionally to any discussant who has called this
standpoint into question in the confrontation stage. Since, by virtue
of rule 1, every discussant also has the unconditional right to call every
standpoint of every other discussant into question, this means that in
principle there is no restriction on challenging any discussant on any
standpoint by any discussant. This unconditional right is laid down in
rule 2:

The discussant who has called the standpoint of the other discussant into question in the confrontation stage is always entitled to challenge this discussant to
defend his standpoint.

The right enshrined in rule 2 may be an unconditional right of a
discussant who has called a particular standpoint into question, but
it is never an obligation. Challenging the other discussant to defend
his standpoint, after all, must be regarded as a challenge to enter
into discussion of this standpoint; if the other discussant accepts this

=== p. 138 ===

invitation, the challenger is bound by it. However, it is possible to imagine cases in which a discussant has good reasons not to enter into a
discussion with this other discussant even though he does not accept
the standpoint. One can think here of the idiosyncratic and unpredictable discussant whom we mentioned in our explanatory comments
on rule 1. It therefore suffices to grant discussants the unconditional
right to do this by virtue of rule 2, whether they are prepared to make
use of this right or not.

The obligation to defend
It follows from the preparatory conditions of the assertive with which a
discussant has expressed a standpoint that he is obliged to put forward
proof or argumentation in defense of this standpoint when asked to
do so. It should immediately be added, however, that it is debatable
whether this obligation should apply under all circumstances, in all situations, and to every challenger. As a rule, a discussant who has been
challenged is always obliged to defend the standpoint, and this obligation can only be removed by a successful defense of the standpoint
or by retraction of the standpoint. A discussant who has successfully
defended a standpoint is not subsequently obliged to defend the same
standpoint again according to the same discussion rules and with the same
premises against the same discussant. This would only lead to a repetition
of the discussion that has already been conducted. It therefore seems
reasonable to us to apply the legal principle of non bis in idem to a
critical discussion too.
    This principle does not apply to discussions either with a different
challenger, or with the same challenger but with different premises, or
different discussion rules. In any of those cases, the challenged discussant is obliged to defend the same standpoint again. Unlike a legal
dispute, an argumentative dispute can in principle never be settled
once and for all. The discussion can always be reopened. After all,
it is quite possible (and very normal in practice) that new light can
be thrown on the case, for example, on the basis of other premises.
The rules for a critical discussion must encourage this, not rule
it out.
    It should be noted that the cessation of the obligation to defend
through a successful defense does not affect the unconditional right
to challenge a discussant as laid down in rule 2. Anyone who puts

=== p. 139 ===

forward a standpoint can be challenged to defend this standpoint, even
if he has already successfully done so. The obligation of the challenged
discussant to accept the challenge is nullified only if he has successfully
defended the same standpoint against the same discussant with the
same premises and the same discussion rules. It is not unreasonable
to keep on challenging somebody, but it is not unreasonable to refuse
to accept every challenge either.
    As a long as a discussant has not yet successfully defended his standpoint (against any other discussant whatsoever), the obligation to defend it holds fully (assuming that he has not retracted the standpoint
in the meantime). There is only one exception to this general rule. A
critical discussion is impossible without certain shared premises and
without shared discussion rules. Discussants who cannot agree on the
premises and the discussion rules are not in a position to resolve a difference of opinion, and are therefore advised not to start a discussion.
A challenged discussant cannot be obliged to defend a standpoint
against a discussant who is not prepared to accept any premises and
discussion rules.
    The general obligation to defend and its crucial exception are laid
down in rule 3:

The discussant who is challenged by the other discussant to defend the standpoint
that he has put forward in the confrontation stage is always obliged to accept
this challenge, unless the other discussant is not prepared to accept any shared
premises and discussion rules; the discussant remains obliged to defend the
standpoint as long as he does not retract it and as long as he has not successfully
defended it against the other discussant on the basis of the agreed premises and
discussion rules.

The obligation to defend as formulated in rule 3 is a (conditional)
obligation to defend in principle. This means that the obligation to defend always applies (provided the conditions laid down are satisfied).
However, there may be reasons or causes that make it impossible to
comply with this obligation immediately in practice. For example, the
discussant who is obliged to defend may not have the time to engage
in a discussion with the challenger, or it may be the case that upon
reflection he wants to document or prepare his case more thoroughly

=== p. 140 ===

first. However, this at most may lead to a postponement of the discussion
(although in practice this can sometimes lead to its cancellation), but
it does not alter the obligation to defend. This obligation holds fully
until the discussant concerned has complied with it or has retracted
his standpoint.
    By recognizing the obligation to defend as laid down in rule 3,
and by accepting the challenge of the other discussant, the discussant
who has put forward the standpoint indicates his preparedness to discuss.
The discussant who has challenged him can in turn indicate his preparedness to discuss by agreeing to shared premises and discussion
rules. Rule 3 is thus aimed at externalizing the willingness to engage
in discussion that may be expected of discussants who are involved in
a dispute.

Allocation of the burden of proof
Rule 3 also regulates how the onus of proof with regard to a standpoint is distributed. Whoever puts forward a standpoint and does not
retract it again bears the onus of proof for this standpoint once he is
challenged (in accordance with the conditions as specified in rule 3)
to defend this standpoint. The onus of proof in a discussion thus lies
with the discussant who has the obligation to defend a standpoint in
accordance with rule 3. In the case of non-mixed differences of opinion, which is what we are assuming here, the problem of allocating
the onus of proof is dealt with by rule 3. In the case of mixed differences of opinion, which are common in practice, the situation is more
complicated. Each party may have called the other’s standpoint into
question and challenged the other party. In this case, however, the
question of who bears the onus of proof is, in principle, not problematic either. The answer is simply that both discussants are obliged to
defend their own standpoint in accordance with rule 3, and therefore
each discussant bears the onus of proof for his respective standpoint.
The question is thus not that of who bears “the” onus of proof in the
discussion, but of who defends his standpoint first.16 The allocation

16 In the case of a mixed dispute, it is thus not the case that the onus of proof has to be

   conferred on one of the two discussants; both discussants bear a particular onus of
   proof.

=== p. 141 ===

of the onus of proof in a mixed discussion does not raise problems of
choice, but instead a problem of order.17
   The discussants will have to consult among themselves to reach
agreement on who defends his standpoint first. If they are unable to
do so, the discussion will probably not take place, but the obligation
to defend remains in force in relation to both standpoints. In the
traditional view of the allocation of the onus of proof, a decision in a
dilemma of this kind is forced by proposing that the person who attacks
an established opinion or an existing state of affairs must begin the
defense (if he is not the only person to bear the onus of proof according
to this view). The conservative character of this view has been pointed
out from various perspectives. Moreover, it is often problematic to
determine what “the established standpoint” is.18

Allocation of the discussion roles
The first agreement that the discussants must make before they begin the argumentation stage concerns the allocation of roles in the
discussion. The question is: Who will assume the role of protagonist,
and who the role of antagonist? The answer to this question seems
fairly obvious: The discussant who has put forward a standpoint in the
confrontation stage must assume the role of the protagonist, and the
discussant who has called this standpoint into question must assume
the role of the antagonist. This is how things will normally proceed in
practice, but it is not necessarily the case. It is quite possible for the
roles to be reversed.
   Although in practice the discussants will often pass over the question of the allocation of roles in silence, the discussant who has put
forward a standpoint will almost automatically act as protagonist, and
the discussant who has called this standpoint into question will do
the same for the role of antagonist. We propose to leave it up to the
discussants themselves to act otherwise if they prefer to do so. One
condition is that both discussants agree to the allocation of roles and
that they maintain the agreed allocation of roles throughout the whole
discussion.

17 See Hamblin (1970) and van Eemeren and Houtlosser (2002c).
18 See van Eemeren and Houtlosser (2003).

=== p. 142 ===

The discussant who in the opening stage has accepted the other discussant’s
challenge to defend his standpoint will fulfill the role of protagonist in the
argumentation stage, and the other discussant will fulfill the role of antagonist,
unless they agree otherwise; the distribution of roles is maintained until the end

In the argumentation stage, the discussant who has assumed the role of
protagonist tries to defend the initial standpoint against the discussant
who has assumed the role of antagonist. The question is how the protagonist can defend the standpoint and how the antagonist can attack
the standpoint. A further question is when are these attempts at defense and attack successful – in other words, when has the protagonist
successfully defended the initial standpoint and when has the antagonist
successfully attacked the initial standpoint.

Agreements concerning the discussion rules
Attacking and defending a standpoint take place in a critical discussion in accordance with shared rules of discussion. We shall discuss
a number of these discussion rules for the argumentation stage. As
mentioned earlier, these discussion rules must be understood as proposals that only come into force in a discussion once they have been
accepted by the discussants who fulfill the roles of protagonist and
antagonist. This means that the discussants in question have declared
their readiness to conduct the discussion in accordance with shared
rules. If the discussants who take part in a discussion have done this, the
rules acquire the status of conventions by which the parties are bound
during the discussion and to which they hold one another. In fully
externalized discussions, this agreement on the discussion rules takes
place explicitly. In practice, however, discussants often tacitly assume
that they accept more or less the same discussion rules. Unlike in the
case of explicitly agreed rules, the discussants in this case assume that
they are bound by conventions.
   The difference between explicit agreements and conventions need
not necessarily have serious consequences for the course of the discussion. If both parties consistently abide by the rules, there is not
even any difference between the two at all. The advantage of explicitly
agreed rules only emerges if there is disagreement on the force of a
rule applied by the other party or on the correctness of the application

=== p. 143 ===

of a rule in force. Explicit formulation makes it easier to reach a decision both on the force and on the application of the rule that is at
issue.
   As mentioned earlier, one consequence of explicit agreement on
the discussion rules is that the discussants are bound by these rules (at
least for the duration of the discussion). This implies that the discussion rules themselves may no longer be raised for discussion during
the discussion itself. The rules apply as long as this discussion between
these discussants continues. The only question concerning the rules
that may be raised during the discussion is whether they are correctly
applied. Of course, this does not mean that the rules may not be raised
for discussion after the discussion has taken place or before the start of
a new discussion. It certainly does not mean that there are rules that
may never be raised for discussion. Without any exception, all rules
can be called into question by any discussant who sees fit to do so.
The rule that is questioned then acquires the status of a proposition
on which different standpoints can be adopted (cf. rule 1). The discussion that arises on the rule, if one does, is a meta-discussion.

The discussants who will fulfill the roles of protagonist and antagonist in the
argumentation stage agree before the start of the argumentation stage on the
rules for the following: how the protagonist is to defend the initial standpoint
and how the antagonist is to attack it, and in which case the protagonist
has successfully defended the standpoint and in which case the antagonist
has successfully attacked it. These rules apply throughout the duration of the
discussion, and may not be called into question during the discussion itself by
either of the parties.

Attacking and defending standpoints
Three types of speech acts are performed in the argumentation stage:
By means of assertives, the protagonist performs exclusively the complex speech act of argumentation, while the antagonist accepts this argumentation by performing the commissive acceptance or declines this
argumentation by performing the negation of this commissive; the antagonist can then perform the directive request to elicit a new argumentation. These are the only accepted ways of attacking or defending standpoints in a critical discussion. They represent a right of the protagonist
and the antagonist that is in principle unrestricted. The antagonist

=== p. 144 ===

may attack every argumentation advanced by the protagonist in this
way (and in no other way), and every argumentation that is called into
question may be defended in this way (and in no other way).
    Putting forward argumentation in defense of a standpoint is always
a provisional defense. The protagonist has not defended a standpoint
definitively until the antagonist has fully accepted the argumentation.
The acceptance of an argumentation implies that the propositions expressed in the argumentation are accepted and that the constellation
formed by the argumentative utterances is regarded as legitimizing
(pro-argumentation) or refuting (contra-argumentation) the proposition to which the standpoint pertains. The antagonist who does not
accept the argumentation of the protagonist can thus call its propositional content into question, but he can also call into question its force
as a justification or refutation.

a. The protagonist may always defend the standpoint that he adopts in the
initial difference of opinion or in a sub-difference of opinion by performing
a complex speech act of argumentation, which then counts as a provisional
defense of this standpoint.

b. The antagonist may always attack a standpoint by calling into question
the propositional content or the justificatory or refutatory force of the argumentation.

c. The protagonist and the antagonist may not defend or attack standpoints
in any other way.

The discussion rules for the argumentation stage must explicitly lay
down in which case the defense of the protagonist is to be regarded
as successful. The rules must indicate when the antagonist is obliged
to accept the argumentation put forward by the protagonist as an
adequate defense of the standpoint. Then and only then, when the
protagonist has defended a standpoint in accordance with the rules
and the antagonist is obliged to accept the defense in accordance with
these rules, may the protagonist be said to have successfully defended
his standpoint. If the protagonist fails to do so, the antagonist has
successfully attacked the standpoint (assuming, of course, that he has
observed the other discussion rules).

=== p. 145 ===

    We shall first concentrate on the regulations that apply when (part
of ) the propositional content of an argumentation is called into question. By calling the propositional content of an argumentation into
question, the antagonist creates a new point of contention. Since the
protagonist has adduced the argumentation in support of the standpoint, he will adopt a positive standpoint with regard to this proposition and is obliged (by virtue of rules 3 and 4) to defend it again. Beside
the initial dispute, bearing on the initial standpoint of the protagonist, a
sub-dispute then arises, bearing on this positive sub-standpoint. A whole
chain of sub-disputes, sub-sub-disputes, and so on can arise in this way.
In this case, the argumentation of the protagonist is subordinatively
compound.
    In which case is the antagonist obliged to accept the propositional
content of an argumentation? This question can only be answered if
the discussants that are to fulfill the roles of protagonist and antagonist
agree in the opening stage on how they will decide on the acceptability
of the propositions advanced by the protagonist in his argumentation. To this end, they must explicitly spell out both which list of propositions they both accept and how they will decide together on the acceptability
of other propositions.

The intersubjective identification procedure
The propositions that are accepted by both parties may concern facts,
truths, norms, values, or value hierarchies. The discussants are completely free to draw up a list of propositions accepted by both parties.
All the propositions they both accept may be included. The only restriction is that the list must be consistent. It may not contain any
propositions that are inconsistent with other propositions. Otherwise
it would always be possible to successfully defend any arbitrary standpoint against an attacker, which inevitably renders the resolution of a
difference of opinion impossible. That a proposition is included in the
list of accepted propositions means only that the discussants are agreed
that the proposition in question may not be called into question during the discussion. In other words, for the purpose of this discussion
they accept it, although they might not do so in other contexts. The
list specifies which propositions have been accepted by the discussants
for the duration of the discussion, and can therefore be regarded as
their shared premises.

=== p. 146 ===

   How can the protagonist make use of the list of agreed propositions
in defending the argumentation that he has advanced? If the antagonist only calls the propositional content of the argumentation into
question, the protagonist can point out that, according to him, the
proposition(s) in question appear(s) in the list. The protagonist and
the antagonist must then check to determine whether this is actually the case. If so, the antagonist is obliged to retract his objection
to the proposition(s) in question and to accept the argumentation.
The protagonist has then successfully defended himself against the attack of the antagonist. This method of defense by the protagonist thus
consists of participating in joint scrutiny, at his request, to determine
whether the propositions that have been called into question really
are identical to the propositions in the list of propositions accepted by
both parties. We refer to this method as the intersubjective identification
procedure. If the application of this procedure yields a positive result,
the antagonist is obliged to accept the propositional content of the
argumentation put forward by the protagonist. If the application of
this procedure yields a negative result, the protagonist is obliged to
retract this argumentation.
   The earlier remarks on the conventional status of the rules for the
argumentation stage also apply to the propositions accepted by both
parties. In fully externalized discussions, it is explicitly determined
in advance which propositions are accepted by both parties, but in
practice, these propositions usually function as mutually presupposed
shared background knowledge. As long as both parties are in tacit
agreement that a particular proposition belongs to the shared background knowledge, it makes no difference. As soon as disagreement
arises, however, neither of the parties can appeal to the other party’s
commitment, and both parties can easily (rightly or wrongly) deny
that they are committed to certain propositions.
   Of course, the protagonist must also be allowed to make use of
propositions on which no prior agreement has been reached. Otherwise
the protagonist would only be able to defend a standpoint by making use of propositions that had already come up at the start of the
discussion. This is an undesirable restriction. The protagonist must
therefore be able to make use of new information in his defense.
   In order to make use of new information in a critical discussion, it is
necessary for the discussants to agree in the opening stage on how they

=== p. 147 ===

will determine whether a proposition should be accepted or not. The
methods agreed on may consist of consulting oral or written sources
(encyclopedias, dictionaries, reference works) or of joint perception
(by way of experiment, or not). As in the case of the list of propositions
accepted by both parties, both discussants must consider the method
chosen to be adequate.

In addition to carrying out the intersubjective identification procedure, the discussants can also decide in the opening stage to allow
for a sub-discussion to be conducted in which it is determined whether
the proposition on which agreement was first lacking can be accepted
in the second instance. The protagonist will then have to take a positive sub-standpoint with regard to the proposition concerned, and
defend it against possible objections and criticisms of the antagonist. This sub-discussion has to be conducted in accordance with the
same premises and the same discussion rules accepted in the original
discussion.19

The consequences of the recommended regulations of the protagonist’s opportunities for defense are laid down in rule 7:

a. The protagonist has successfully defended the propositional content of a
complex speech act of argumentation against an attack by the antagonist if
the application of the intersubjective identification procedure yields a positive result or if the propositional content is in the second instance accepted
by both parties as a result of a sub-discussion in which the protagonist has successfully defended a positive sub-standpoint with regard to this propositional
content.

b. The antagonist has successfully attacked the propositional content of the
complex speech act of argumentation if the application of the intersubjective
identification procedure yields a negative result and the protagonist has not

19 The following explanation might be didactically helpful. At this stage, the discussants

   have not yet reached full agreement on all the premises that, apart from the premise
   at issue, are to be accepted, and the discussion rules that are to be applied. The
   sub-discussion that is required, of course, cannot be conducted effectively until such
   an agreement has been reached.

=== p. 148 ===

successfully defended a positive sub-standpoint with regard to this propositional
content in a sub-discussion.

The intersubjective inference procedure
As laid down in rule 6, the antagonist may call an argumentation into
question not only for its propositional content, but also for its force of
justification or refutation. How can the protagonist successfully defend
himself against an attack on the force of justification or refutation of his
argumentation, and in which case is the antagonist bound to accept?
Before they embark on the argumentation stage, the discussants must
agree in the opening stage on how this will be determined.
    If the protagonist adopts a positive standpoint, the question can be
raised of whether the reasoning “propositional content of the argumentation, thus proposition to which the standpoint refers” is valid as it stands. If
the protagonist adopts a negative standpoint, it is necessary to determine whether the reasoning “propositional content of the argumentation,
thus not proposition to which the standpoint refers” is valid as it is. The validity of the reasoning in the argumentation needs to be judged only if
this reasoning is completely externalized and the protagonist can be
regarded committed to the claim that the soundness of the argumentation depends on its logical validity.
    Being able to check whether the arguments of the protagonist are
logically valid calls for logical rules, such as the dialogue rules of the
Erlangen School, to evaluate the validity of the arguments. This makes
it possible to examine whether a contended proposition is defensible
in relation to the premises (viewed as a concession) that constitute
the argumentation. Since checking the validity of the arguments is
a matter of determining whether the protagonist’s inferences are acceptable, we shall refer to this procedure as the intersubjective inference
procedure.

The intersubjective explicitization procedure
If the reasoning in the argumentation is not completely externalized –
and for that reason cannot be valid as it stands – the question will be
whether the argumentation makes use of an argument scheme that is
considered admissible by both parties and that has been correctly applied. As a rule, the argument scheme employed in an argumentation is
not made explicit in the discourse or text, but has to be reconstructed.

=== p. 149 ===

To this end, the antagonist and the protagonist should jointly carry out
an intersubjective explicitization procedure. This procedure can be based
on similar principles as the procedure that we have developed for
rendering unexpressed premises explicit. It must lead to agreement
between the discussants on the kind of argument scheme that is used
in the argumentation. When the reasoning in the argumentation of
the protagonist is incomplete, and thus cannot be valid, it is in the
interest of the protagonist that the intersubjective explicitization procedure be carried out. It must therefore be carried out at the request
of the protagonist.

The intersubjective testing procedure
Once the argument scheme that is employed in the protagonist’s argumentation has been reconstructed by means of the intersubjective
explicitization procedure, it must be determined whether this argument scheme can be considered admissible by both parties and has
been correctly applied. In order to check that the argumentation of
the protagonist is based on an argument scheme that is admissible, it
is necessary that the protagonist and the antagonist have first jointly
determined which argument schemes may and may not be used. In
principle, the discussants are free to decide on this, provided the decision is based on mutual consent. In special cases, however, there
may be specific institutional conditions in force that prohibit the
use of certain schemes. For example, in some countries the use of
argumentation by analogy is inadmissible in certain criminal law disputes. Of course, discussants may also conclude that it is better to
exclude certain forms of argumentation without such conditions being in force. For instance, they might decide not to use argumentation
based on authority because the subject under discussion does not lend
itself to determination by authority, or they might decide not to draw
any comparisons because as a rule comparisons do not constitute a
decisive argument.
   Only when agreement has been reached on the nature of the argument schemes to be used does it make sense to determine which
applications of the schemes adopted are or are not admissible. For
example, the discussants may appeal to certain conditions for making causal or other connections between different types of propositions. They may also determine which critical questions the different

=== p. 150 ===

argument schemes are expected to answer.20 In these cases, they
may agree that although a comparison is in principle an admissible
form of argumentation, argumentation of this kind will only be regarded as decisive if no single relevant difference can be demonstrated
between the cases under comparison.
    Since checking the overall acceptability of the argument scheme
is concerned with determining how to scrutinize the contents of the
step from the proposition that is expressed in the argumentation to
the proposition that is expressed in the standpoint, we shall refer to
this procedure as the intersubjective testing procedure.

a. The protagonist has successfully defended a complex speech act of argumentation against an attack by the antagonist with regard to its force of justification
or refutation if the application of the intersubjective inference procedure or (after
application of the intersubjective explicitization procedure) the application of
the intersubjective testing procedure yields a positive result.

b. The antagonist has successfully attacked the force of justification or refutation of the argumentation if the application of the intersubjective inference
procedure or (after application of the intersubjective explicitization procedure)
the application of the intersubjective testing procedure yields a negative result.

Attacking and defending standpoints conclusively
On the basis of the discussion so far, and by virtue of rules 7 and 8,
we can now indicate when the protagonist has conclusively defended
an initial standpoint or a sub-standpoint by means of argumentation
and when the antagonist has conclusively attacked this standpoint. For a
conclusive defense of a standpoint, the protagonist must have defended
both the propositional content of the argumentation (as prescribed in
rule 7) and its force of justification or refutation with regard to the proposition on which the standpoint bears (as prescribed in rule 8). For a
conclusive attack on a standpoint, the antagonist must have successfully
attacked either the propositional content of the argumentation or its force
of justification or refutation (as prescribed in rules 7 and 8). The antagonist may try to do both (by virtue of rule 6), but for a conclusive attack

20 See van Eemeren and Grootendorst (1992: 92–102).

=== p. 151 ===

on the standpoint, it is sufficient to succeed in one of the two attempts.
This is laid down in rule 9:

a. The protagonist has conclusively defended an initial standpoint or sub-standpoint by means of a complex speech act of argumentation if he has successfully defended both the propositional content called into question by the
antagonist and its force of justification or refutation called into question by the
antagonist.

b. The antagonist has conclusively attacked the standpoint of the protagonist
if he has successfully attacked either the propositional content or the force of
justification or refutation of the complex speech act of argumentation.

If the protagonist manages to defend the initial standpoint in the
prescribed manner, this standpoint is thereby at the same time conclusively defended. A conclusive defense of a sub-standpoint, however,
does not automatically mean that the initial standpoint is thereby conclusively defended. To defend the initial standpoint conclusively, it is
necessary by virtue of rule 9 that the force of justification or refutation
of the first argumentation also be successfully defended (as prescribed
in rule 8). The same applies, mutatis mutandis, to the defense of sub-standpoints with the help of sub-sub-standpoints, and so on.

Optimal use of the right to attack
Rules 7, 8, and 9 refer to attacking and defending standpoints, but
the antagonist need not necessarily call into question everything that
the protagonist puts forward in the discussion. By virtue of rule 6, the
antagonist is entitled to call into question both the propositional
content and the force of justification or refutation of each of the protagonist’s argumentations, but he is not obliged to do so. It is quite
possible, however – and very common in practice too – that in the
course of the discussion the antagonist may suddenly realize that he
was wrong in accepting the whole argumentation without objection. It
may also happen that he has in the first instance only called into question the propositional content of an argumentation, but not its force
of justification or refutation, and regrets this upon reflection. The antagonist must be given the opportunity to exercise the rights that he
passed up earlier. That opportunity can be given to the antagonist by

=== p. 152 ===

allowing him to make use of the right to which he is entitled by
virtue of rule 6 throughout the entire discussion. This addition to rule 6
thus offers the antagonist the opportunity to make optimal use of
his right of attack, and it is therefore conducive to the resolution of a
difference of opinion.

The antagonist retains throughout the entire discussion the right to call into
question both the propositional content and the force of justification or refutation
of every complex speech act of argumentation of the protagonist that the latter
has not yet successfully defended.

Optimal use of the right to defend
By virtue of rule 9, for a conclusive defense of the initial standpoint,
the protagonist is obliged to defend himself against all attacks by the
antagonist on an argumentation that he has put forward. However, it is
possible that the antagonist has called into question both the propositional content of an argumentation and its force of justification or refutation, and that the protagonist has in the first instance only defended
himself against the first attack by conducting a new argumentation.
The antagonist may then call this new argumentation into question,
and if the protagonist defends himself against this attack, this does
not mean that the first argumentation has thereby been conclusively
defended. The protagonist must be given the opportunity to defend
it conclusively at this point. This opportunity can be offered by allowing him to defend every argumentation that is attacked throughout
the whole discussion against the attacks of the antagonist. This gives
the protagonist the opportunity to make optimal use of his right of
defense, and this too, like the optimal use of the right of attack by the
antagonist, is conducive to the resolution of a difference of opinion.

The protagonist retains throughout the entire discussion the right to defend
both the propositional content and the force of justification or refutation of
every complex speech act of argumentation that he has performed and not yet
successfully defended against every attack by the antagonist.

Another way of enabling the protagonist to make optimal use of
the right of defense is to give him the opportunity to retract an

=== p. 153 ===

argumentation that has already been put forward once. It may happen that the protagonist in the first instance considers that he can
defend the initial standpoint or sub-standpoint conclusively by means
of this argumentation, while later he realizes that this is not the case.
By retracting an argumentation, the protagonist withdraws his commitment to it and thus also the obligation to defend it. In this way,
the protagonist can correct himself in the course of the discussion.
He may replace the retracted argumentation with another, which he
considers able to be defended successfully. Protagonists should have
the opportunity both to withdraw an argumentation on their own initiative without its being called into question by the antagonist, and if
the antagonist has called the argumentation into question. Since the
obligation to defend the argumentation ceases when it is retracted,
protagonists may still be able to satisfy the requirement formulated in
rule 9 for a conclusive defense of initial standpoints.

The protagonist retains throughout the entire discussion the right to retract any
complex speech act of argumentation that he has performed, and thereby to
remove the obligation to defend it.

The orderly conduct of the discussion
The addition at the end of rules 10 and 11 means that the antagonist
may not carry out attacks on an argumentation that the protagonist has
already successfully defended and that the protagonist does not have
to defend (and is not even allowed to defend!) himself against attacks
that he has already successfully parried. These provisions prevent the
discussion from being endlessly held up by repetitions of identical
attacks or defenses. Such repetitions are pointless because they are in
no way conducive to a resolution of the difference of opinion. The
legal principle of non bis in idem – already mentioned in connection
with rule 3 – is applicable here as well.
    A critical discussion must not only not contain any pointless repetitions of identical speech acts; it must also proceed in an orderly fashion. This requires provisions that are conducive to the
rapid and efficient resolution of differences of opinion. These provisions taken as a whole form a set of regulations for the orderly conduct
of a critical discussion. The provisions contained in rule 13 can be

=== p. 154 ===

regarded as an important part of such a set of regulations on orderly
conduct.

a. The protagonist and the antagonist may perform the same speech act or the
same complex speech act with the same role in the discussion only once.

b. The protagonist and the antagonist must in turn make a move of (complex)
speech acts with a particular role in the discussion.

c. The protagonist and the antagonist may not perform more than one move of
(complex) speech acts at one time.

In the concluding stage, the discussant who has carried out the role of
protagonist in the argumentation stage either does or does not retract
the initial standpoint, and the discussant who has carried out the role of
antagonist in the argumentation stage either does or does not maintain
the calling into question of the initial standpoint. The discussants close
the discussion together by determining the final outcome (that may
or may not lead them to start a new discussion). The only point that
calls for explicit regulation in the concluding stage is to determine in
which case the protagonist is obliged to retract the initial standpoint
on the basis of the attacks carried out by the antagonist during the
argumentation stage, and in which case the antagonist is obliged to
retract his calling the initial standpoint into question on the basis
of the defense carried out by the protagonist. These regulations are
embodied in rule 14:

a. The protagonist is obliged to retract the initial standpoint if the antagonist has conclusively attacked it (in the manner prescribed in rule 9) in the
argumentation stage (and has also observed the other discussion rules).

b. The antagonist is obliged to retract the calling into question of the initial
standpoint if the protagonist has conclusively defended it (in the manner prescribed in rule 9) in the argumentation stage (and has also observed the other
discussion rules).

c. In all other cases, the protagonist is not obliged to retract the initial standpoint, nor is the antagonist obliged to withdraw his calling into question the
initial standpoint.

=== p. 155 ===

No rule is needed to determine in which case the protagonist may retract the initial standpoint or in which case the antagonist may retract
his calling into question of the initial standpoint. Both the protagonist and the antagonist are entitled to do so at every stage of the
discussion. If one of them makes use of this entitlement, the difference of opinion is thereby immediately removed and the discussion is
over. Of course, this premature conclusion to the discussion cannot be
regarded as a resolution of the difference of opinion that is the outcome
    The reason for not laying down this right of retraction on the part of
the protagonist and the antagonist in a discussion rule is that this right
follows immediately from the premise on which all the discussion rules
are based. After all, all discussion rules assume that the discussants can
never be obliged or forced to put forward or to call into question a
standpoint. On this premise, discussants who put forward standpoints
or call them into question do so of their own free will, and this means
that they are also entitled to withdraw these standpoints or expressions
of doubt of their own free will as well.
    Nor is a rule necessary to indicate in which case the protagonist
may continue to maintain the initial standpoint and in which case the
antagonist may continue to call that initial standpoint into question.
The reason is that this is already implied by rule 14. If the antagonist is
obliged to retract his calling the initial standpoint into question, then
the protagonist automatically has the right to continue to maintain
the initial standpoint, and if the protagonist is obliged to retract the
initial standpoint, the antagonist automatically has the right to continue to call that initial standpoint into question. The protagonist and
the antagonist must themselves decide whether they wish to make use
of this right or not.
    After the discussants have concluded the discussion by jointly determining who has won the discussion, in accordance with rule 14, they
can decide to conduct a new discussion or not. This new discussion, for
example, might concern a different initial standpoint with regard to
the same proposition, a statement that formulates a proposition from
the list of accepted propositions (that is, a premise of the previous
discussion) or a previously accepted discussion rule (so that a meta-discussion arises). Of course, it is for the discussants to decide whether
they want to begin a new discussion (and if so, what its subject is). If

=== p. 156 ===

they decide to do so, the rules for conducting a critical discussion will
apply to the new discussion as well.

Rights and obligations regarding usage declaratives
In the confrontation stage of a critical discussion, it is very important
that the discussants understand each other’s speech acts. This naturally
holds for the other stages of the discussion as well. If a discussant is
unclear in formulating his standpoint or in calling a standpoint into
question, or if the other discussant misinterprets the formulations,
there is a high probability that they will speak at cross-purposes. It
is also conceivable that no discussion will arise at all, since in view
of the formulation the other discussant sees no grounds for calling
the standpoint into question. The rules for a critical discussion must
therefore not only be conducive to the externalization of differences
of opinion, but above all to the optimal externalization of the differences. To this end, discussants must formulate optimally and they must
also interpret optimally. Although it is not easy to determine when a
formulation or an interpretation is optimal, the formulations and interpretations must at least not obstruct the resolution of a difference of
opinion in a critical discussion. The consequence of this requirement
is that a discussant must choose formulations that are comprehensible to the other discussants, and that these other discussants must
interpret the formulations in accordance with their well-considered
assumptions about the first discussant’s intention. Moreover, where
necessary, all discussants must be prepared to replace their formulations and interpretations with better ones.
    Aiming for optimal formulations and optimal interpretations does
not, unfortunately, mean that these aims are attained automatically.
To be on the safe side, discussants who doubt the clarity of their formulation would do well to replace it by a formulation they consider to
be clearer, and discussants who doubt their interpretation would do
well, to be on the safe side, to put it to the other discussant and ask for
an amplification, specification, or other usage declarative.
    The resolution of differences is furthered if the discussants have
the opportunity, either of their own accord or at the request of others,
to provide an amplification, specification, explanation, or definition.
If the discussants consider it desirable, they may therefore always perform such usage declaratives in a discussion and they may also always

=== p. 157 ===

request other discussants to perform a usage declarative. The latter
right creates an obligation for the other discussant to accede to a request of this kind. The rights and obligations of discussants in relation
to the performance of usage declaratives or to requesting the performance of usage declaratives are laid down in rule 15:

a. The discussants have the right at every stage of the discussion to request the
other discussant to perform a usage declarative and to perform one themselves.

b. The discussant who is requested to perform a usage declarative by the other
discussant is obliged to act accordingly.

Our proposals for rules for a critical discussion come to an end with
rule 15. Each of the rules formulated here makes it possible to satisfy
a necessary condition for the resolution of a difference of opinion.
As a whole, the rules are conducive to the resolution of a difference
of opinion by means of argumentative discussions. The rules do not
guarantee that differences of opinion can always be resolved in practice
by means of these rules. That, naturally, requires more.21

21 We refer here not only to further elaborations, specifications, and above all “oper-

  ationalizations” that are called for, but also to the fulfillment of the “higher-order
  conditions.” See van Eemeren, Grootendorst, Jackson, and Jacobs (1993: 30–34) and
  Chapter 8 of this volume.

