=== chunk: eemeren-grootendorst-2004-systematic-theory/ch8-code-of-conduct ===
title: Code of Conduct for Reasonable Discussants (ten commandments)
source_pdf: docs/sources/eemeren-grootendorst-2004-systematic-theory/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 197-206
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 187
plan_page_end: 196
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 187 ===

   A Code of Conduct for Reasonable Discussants

               Characteristics of reasonable discussants
The pragma-dialectical rules for a critical discussion presented in
Chapter 6 combine to form a discussion procedure that indicates
which norms the speech acts performed by either of the parties in a difference of opinion must satisfy in order to contribute to the resolution
of the difference of opinion. In our view, a theory of argumentation
must, first, formulate a discussion procedure that provides a general
survey of the rules for implementing the norms that constitute the
“first-order” conditions for conducting a critical discussion. These
rules are to be considered as the rules that are to be followed in order to
play the game effectively, and they are to be judged for their capacity to
serve this purpose well – their problem-validity. In order for the rules
to be of any practical significance, however, there also must be potential
discussants who are prepared to play the game by these rules, because
they accept them intersubjectively – so that the rules acquire conventional validity as well. In practice, argumentation theorists cannot go
much further than to propose the rules and defend their acceptability.
   Our claim that the pragma-dialectical discussion rules will in principle be acceptable to discussants who want to resolve their differences of opinion in a reasonable way is based, first, on the effectiveness of the rules.1 Because the rules have been specially drawn up to

1 See van Eemeren and Grootendorst (1988).

=== p. 188 ===

promote the resolution of differences of opinion, assuming that they
are correctly formulated, they should be acceptable to anyone who has
that aim in view.2 Viewed philosophically, it can be observed that there
is a pragmatic reason for such discussants to accept these instrumental rules that some would characterize as “utilitarian.”3 It should be
borne in mind, however, that the primary aim of a critical discussion is
not to maximize agreement but to test contested standpoints as critically as possible by means of a systematic critical discussion of whether
or not they are tenable.4 In accordance with the critical-rationalistic
ideal, people in this case are stimulated to be critical by confronting
other people’s standpoints methodically with a maximum of doubt.5
Reaching an outcome of the discussion that is optimally satisfactory
to all parties concerned certainly does not automatically mean that
the protagonists and antagonists are in the end in agreement on
everything.
    Proposing a model of a critical discussion, as we did, may lead to
running the risk of being identified with striving for an unattainable
utopia. The primary function of the pragma-dialectical model of a
critical discussion, however, is a different one. By clearly and systematically indicating what the rules for conducting a critical discussion
are, the model provides those who want to fulfill the role of reasonable discussants with a series of well-defined guidelines, which may,
though formulated on a higher level of abstraction and based on a
more clearly articulated philosophical ideal, to a great extent be identical to the norms they would like to see observed anyway.6 For those
who are prepared to use the model of a critical discussion as their

2 Instead of, or in addition to, this pragmatic rationale, there may be an ethical rationale

  for accepting (part of ) a code of conduct for reasonable discussants based on the
  pragma-dialectical discussion procedure such as the one we are proposing in this
  chapter.
3 Those people who assess rules for resolving differences of opinion on their instrumen-

  tal merits, and whose criterion is that in mutual cooperation the outcome that is most
  satisfactory to both parties must be reached, can be called utilitarians. Unlike egoistics,
  these types of utilitarians strive for the optimal result for all concerned. See Bentham
  (1952) and Mill (1863/1972). See also van Eemeren and Grootendorst (1988).
4 This position could be characterized as “negative utilitarianism.” Rather than

  achieving the greatest possible happiness, the general aim is achieving the least possible unhappiness.
5 See Popper (1971: chapter 5, note 6).
6 For some first empirical evidence, see van Eemeren, Meuffels, and Verburg (2000).

=== p. 189 ===

guiding principle, what are the requirements the discussion attitude
must fulfill?7 And viewing these matters from a practical perspective,
under which circumstances are they able, and can they afford, to assume such a reasonable discussion attitude?
    If the rules of the pragma-dialectical discussion procedure are regarded as first-order conditions for having a critical discussion, as we
have just explained, the internal conditions for a reasonable discussion attitude can be viewed as “second-order” conditions relating to
the state of mind the discussants are assumed to be in. To some extent, everyone who wants to satisfy the second-order conditions can
do so, but in practice, people’s freedom is sometimes more or less
severely limited by psychological factors that are beyond their control, such as emotional restraint and personal pressure. Besides such
second-order conditions, there are also external, “third-order” conditions that need to be fulfilled in order to be able to conduct a critical
discussion properly. They relate to the social circumstances in which
the discussion takes place and pertain, for instance, to the power or authority relationships between the participants and to special features of
the situation in which the discussion takes place.8 Together, the internal second-order conditions and the external third-order conditions
for conducting a critical discussion in the ideal sense are higher order
conditions for resolving differences of opinion.9 Only if these higher
order conditions are satisfied can critical reasonableness be fully realized in practice. Compliance with second-order conditions can to
some extent be stimulated by education that is methodically directed
at reflection on the first-order rules and understanding their rationale.

7 For this kind of person, doubt is intrinsic to his attitude to life, and criticism a way of

  resolving problems. Argumentative discourse and texts are then seen as ways of tracing
  weak spots in standpoints. Shielding standpoints from criticism (immunization) and
  every form of fundamentalism are therefore to be opposed. This requires a nondogmatic and anti-authoritarian approach and a distrust of unshakeable principles
  and claims to infallibility.
8 It may even be useful to distinguish “fourth-order” conditions pertaining to what

  Searle (1969) calls “normal input and output conditions” for verbal communication.
  Since the latter conditions are not confined to argumentative discussions, they are
  discounted here.
9 The distinction between “first-order” conditions and the “higher-order” conditions

  is in the first instance derived from Barth and Krabbe (1982: 75). In the way it is
  presented here, it goes back to van Eemeren, Grootendorst, Jackson, and Jacobs
  (1993: 30–34).

=== p. 190 ===

And the fulfillment of third-order conditions can be promoted by a
political choice for individual freedom, non-violence, intellectual pluralism, and institutional guarantees for the right to information and
criticism.

              Ten commandments for reasonable discussants
As we have formulated it in Chapter 6, the pragma-dialectical procedure for conducting a critical discussion is too technical for immediate
use by ordinary discussants: It is a theoretical model for examining argumentative discourse and texts. For practical purposes, we now propose a simple code of conduct for reasonable discussants who want to
resolve their differences of opinion by means of argumentation that
is based on the critical insights expressed in the pragma-dialectical
discussion procedure. This code of conduct consists of ten basic requirements for reasonable behavior, profanely referred to as the “ten
commandments.” Instead of stating all the rules that are to be taken
into account in a critical discussion, the commandments only list prohibitions of moves in an argumentative discourse or text that hinder
or obstruct the resolution of a difference of opinion.

Commandment 1 of the code of conduct is the freedom rule :

1       Discussants may not prevent each other from advancing standpoints or
        from calling standpoints into question.

Commandment 1 is designed to ensure that standpoints, and doubt
regarding standpoints, can be expressed freely.10 It is a necessary requirement for resolving differences of opinion, because a difference of
opinion can never be resolved if it is not clear to the parties involved
that a difference of opinion exists and what that difference entails.
In an argumentative discourse or text, the parties must therefore have
ample opportunity to make their positions known. In this way, in those
parts of the discourse or text in which they express the difference of
opinion, they can make sure that the confrontation stage of a critical
discussion is properly completed. According to the code of conduct

10 Commandment 1 is instrumental to complying with rules 1, 6b, and 10 of the pragma-

    dialectical discussion procedure, and is also relevant to rules 2, 3, and 14.

=== p. 191 ===

for reasonable discussants, putting forward a standpoint and calling a
standpoint into question are both basic rights that all discussants must
accord each other unconditionally and without reservation.11

Commandment 2 is the obligation-to-defend rule :

2      Discussants who advance a standpoint may not refuse to defend this
       standpoint when requested to do so.

Commandment 2 is designed to ensure that standpoints that are put
forward and called into question in an argumentative discourse or
text are defended against critical attacks.12 A difference of opinion
remains stuck in the opening stage of a critical discussion and cannot
be resolved if the party who has advanced a standpoint is not prepared
to fulfill the role of protagonist. According to the code of conduct,
someone who puts forward a standpoint therefore automatically assumes the obligation to defend that standpoint if requested to do so.

Commandment 3 is the standpoint rule :

3      Attacks on standpoints may not bear on a standpoint that has not actually
       been put forward by the other party.

Commandment 3 is primarily designed to ensure that attacks – and,
consequently, defenses by means of argumentation – really relate to the
standpoint that is indeed advanced by the protagonist.13 A difference
of opinion cannot be resolved if the antagonist actually criticizes a
different standpoint and, as a consequence, the protagonist defends a
different standpoint. A genuine resolution of a difference of opinion is
not possible if an antagonist or a protagonist distorts the original standpoint in any way whatsoever. The third commandment of the code

11 By way of illustration, it may be added that to satisfy the first-order condition entailed

   in this commandment, the second-order condition – that the participants in the
   discussion are prepared to express their opinions and to listen to the opinions of
   others – must be fulfilled. In fairness, this attitude can only be assumed to exist if the
   third-order condition – that the social reality in which the discussion takes place is
   such that the participants are entirely free to put forward their views – is fulfilled.
12 Commandment 2 is instrumental to complying with rule 3 of the pragma-dialectical

   discussion procedure, and is also relevant to rules 2, 4, and 12.
13 Commandment 3 is primarily instrumental to complying with rule 2 of the pragma-

   dialectical discussion procedure, and is also relevant to rules 14c and 15.

=== p. 192 ===

of conduct, together with the fourth, are intended to ensure that the
attacks and defenses carried out in those parts of an argumentative
discourse or text that represent the argumentation stage of a critical
discussion are correctly related to the standpoint that the protagonist
has advanced.

Commandment 4 is the relevance rule :

4      Standpoints may not be defended by non-argumentation or argumentation that is not relevant to the standpoint.

Commandment 4 is designed to ensure that the defense of standpoints
takes place only by means of relevant argumentation.14 If the argumentation stage of a critical discussion is not properly passed through, the
standpoint at issue will not be assessed on its merits.15 The difference
of opinion that is at the heart of an argumentative discourse or text
cannot be resolved if the protagonist does not put forward any argumentation, but substitutes only rhetorical devices such as pathos or
ethos for logos instead, or advances arguments that are irrelevant to the
defense of the standpoint that has been advanced but pertain to some
other standpoint that is not at issue.16

Commandment 5 is the unexpressed-premise rule :

5      Discussants may not falsely attribute unexpressed premises to the other
       party, nor disown responsibility for their own unexpressed premises.

Commandment 5 ensures that every part of the protagonist’s argumentation can be critically examined by the antagonist as part of the
argumentation that is advanced in a critical discussion – including

14 Commandment 4 is instrumental to complying with rule 6, and especially its subsec-

   tions a and c, of the pragma-dialectical discussion procedure, and is also relevant to
   rule 8.
15 Referring once more to the higher-order conditions: To satisfy the first-order condi-

   tion entailed in this commandment, the second-order condition that a person who
   has advanced a standpoint must be willing to provide arguments for that standpoint
   must be fulfilled. Also, the third-order condition – that the standpoint and arguments
   are not dictated by a superior – has to be satisfied.
16 This is not to say that advancing argumentation cannot be combined with, or even

   include, the use of pathos and ethos, or that relevant arguments cannot be suggested
   by, or even implied in, apparently irrelevant arguments.

=== p. 193 ===

those parts that have remained implicit in the discourse or text.17 A difference of opinion cannot be resolved if the protagonist tries to evade
his obligation to defend an unexpressed premise, or if the antagonist
misrepresents an unexpressed premise – for example, by exaggerating
its scope. If the difference of opinion is to be resolved, the protagonist
must accept responsibility for the elements that he has left implicit in
the discourse or text, and in reconstructing as part of a critical discussion what the protagonist has left unexpressed, the antagonist must
try as accurately as possible to determine what the protagonist can be
held to.

Commandment 6 is the starting-point rule :

6      Discussants may not falsely present something as an accepted starting
       point or falsely deny that something is an accepted starting point.

Commandment 6 is intended to ensure that when standpoints are
being attacked and defended, the starting point of the discussion is
used in a proper way.18 In order to be able to resolve a difference
of opinion, the protagonist and the antagonist must know what their
common starting point is. A protagonist or an antagonist may not
present something as an accepted starting point if it is not. Neither
may a party deny that something is an accepted starting point if it is
so. Otherwise it is impossible for a protagonist to defend a standpoint
conclusively – and for an antagonist to attack that standpoint successfully – on the basis of agreed premises that can be viewed as concessions
made by the other party.

Commandment 7 is the validity rule :

7      Reasoning that in an argumentation is presented as formally conclusive
       may not be invalid in a logical sense.

Commandment 7 is designed to ensure that protagonists who resort
to formal reasoning in resolving a difference of opinion use only

17 Commandment 5 is instrumental to complying with rules 8 and 9 of the pragma-

    dialectical discussion procedure.
18 Commandment 6 is primarily instrumental to complying with rules 5 and 7 of the

    pragma-dialectical discussion procedure.

=== p. 194 ===

reasoning that is valid in a logical sense.19 It is possible for the antagonists and protagonists to determine whether the standpoints that
are defended in a discourse or text do indeed follow logically from
the argumentation that is advanced only if the reasoning that is used
in the argumentation is expressed in full. If not every part of the reasoning has been fully externalized, a reconstruction of the implicit
elements is called for in an analysis of the argumentative discourse or
text. When such a reconstruction is carried out, however, in certain
cases Commandment 7 may prove not to apply because in view of the
communicative situation at hand, a further, and more drastic, reconstruction is required that involves adding an unexpressed premise that
goes beyond the “logical minimum” and renders Commandment 7
irrelevant.20

Commandment 8 is the argument scheme rule :

8      Standpoints may not be regarded as conclusively defended by argumentation that is not presented as based on formally conclusive reasoning if
       the defense does not take place by means of appropriate argument schemes
       that are applied correctly.

Commandment 8 is designed to ensure that standpoints can indeed be conclusively defended by arguments that are not presented
as logically valid if the protagonist and the antagonist are agreed
on a method to test the soundness of the types of arguments

19 Commandment 7 pertains to rules 8 and 9 of the pragma-dialectical discussion pro-

   cedure. Of course, what is meant by valid in a logical sense can be interpreted in
   different ways, depending on the logical theory that is taken as the starting point. It
   is an interesting academic question as to what logical theory provides the best starting point, but we cannot deal with this question in the context of this discussion of
   a practical code of conduct.
20 For the pragma-dialectical analysis of unexpressed premises, see van Eemeren and

   Grootendorst (1992: 60–72). According to this method, identifying an unexpressed
   premise involves first validating the reasoning as an intermediary heuristic step in
   the reconstruction procedure and then determining the “pragmatic optimum” that
   may in the context concerned be regarded as the unexpressed premise (which can
   result in an argument that is, strictly speaking, not logically valid). Largely as a result
   of Erik C.W. Krabbe’s useful comments in describing the reconstruction procedure
   in this way, and in phrasing Commandment 7 in the way we did, we deviate in some
   respects from recent descriptions as given in van Eemeren, Grootendorst, and Snoeck
   Henkemans (2002: chapter 4).

=== p. 195 ===

concerned.21 A difference of opinion can only be resolved if the
antagonist and the protagonist agree on how to determine whether
the protagonist has adopted appropriate argument schemes and has
applied them correctly.22 This implies that they must examine whether
the argument schemes that are used are, in principle, admissible in
the light of what has been agreed upon in the opening stage, and
whether they have been correctly fleshed out in the argumentation
stage.

Commandment 9, bearing on the concluding stage, is the concluding
rule:

9       Inconclusive defenses of standpoints may not lead to maintaining these
        standpoints, and conclusive defenses of standpoints may not lead to
        maintaining expressions of doubt concerning these standpoints.

Commandment 9 is designed to ensure that the protagonists and the
antagonists correctly ascertain the outcome in the concluding stage
of the discussion.23 This is a necessary, though sometimes neglected,
part of analyzing and evaluating argumentative discourses or texts as a
critical discussion. A difference of opinion is resolved only if the parties
are in agreement that the defense of the standpoints at issue has been
successful or has not been successful. A discussion that seems to have
run without any hitches is still unsatisfactory if at the end a protagonist
unjustly claims to have successfully defended a standpoint, or even that
he has now proved that the standpoint is true. The discussion ends
in an equally unsatisfactory manner if an antagonist unjustly claims
that the defense has not been successful, or even that the opposite
standpoint is now proven.

Commandment 10 is the general language use rule :
10        Discussants may not use any formulations that are insufficiently clear
          or confusingly ambiguous, and they may not deliberately misinterpret
          the other party’s formulations.

21 Commandment 8 pertains to rules 8 and 9 of the pragma-dialectical discussion

     procedure.
22 See van Eemeren and Grootendorst (1992: 94–102).
23 Commandment 9 is instrumental to complying with rule 14 of the pragma-dialectical

     discussion procedure.

=== p. 196 ===

Commandment 10 is designed to ensure that misunderstandings arising from unclear, vague, or equivocal formulations in the discourse
or text are avoided.24 A difference of opinion can only be resolved if
each party makes a real effort to express his intentions as accurately
as possible in a way that minimizes the chances of misunderstanding.
Equally, a difference of opinion can only be resolved if each party
makes a real effort not to misinterpret any of the other party’s speech
acts. Problems of formulation or interpretation may otherwise lead to
a “pseudo-difference” of opinion or a “pseudo-resolution” of a difference of opinion. Problems of formulation and interpretation are not
confined to a specific stage in the resolution process; they can occur
at any stage of a critical discussion.

24 Commandment 10 is instrumental to complying with rule 15 of the pragma-dialectical

  discussion procedure and is also relevant to rule 13.

