=== chunk: martinich-2015-philosophical-writing/ch2-logic-and-argument ===
title: Logic and Argument for Writing
source_pdf: docs/sources/martinich-2015-philosophical-writing/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 31-71
page_scheme: pdf
plan_page_start: 31
plan_page_end: 71
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 31 ===

Logic and Argument for Writing
In his Poetics, Aristotle remarks that a well-constructed dramatic plot
must reflect an action which is “whole and complete in itself and of
some magnitude.” He goes on to define a whole as “that which has a
beginning, middle, and end.” Though Greek tragedy and philosophical
prose may seem like quite disparate fields of literary endeavor,
Aristotle’s advice applies to writing a philosophical essay.
Just as the core of a dramatic work is its plot, the core of a
philosophical essay is its argument. And just as a good play will have a
well-demarcated beginning, middle, and end, so too will a good essay.
The beginning of a philosophical essay introduces the argument; the
middle elaborates it; the end summarizes it. But what is an argument?
Every competent speaker of English has some idea of what an
argument is. And most, upon reflection, would realize that argument
is in fact equivocal; that is, it has more than one sense. In one sense, it
is roughly synonymous with quarrel and in another sense roughly
synonymous with reasoning. In theory, philosophers engage only in
the latter, although in practice they sometimes stumble into the
former.
The philosophically relevant sense of argument has been made more
precise by logicians, who, in the course of 2,500 years, have discovered
quite a bit about arguments. Although this is not a logic text, a little
logic is crucial for understanding the structure of a philosophical
essay.

1 What is a Good Argument?
At the simplest level, there are two kinds of arguments: good ones and
bad ones. A good argument is one that does what it is supposed to do.
A bad argument is one that does not. A good argument is one that
shows a person a rational way to go from true premises to a true

=== p. 32 ===

conclusion, as well as the subject allows (some subjects more easily or
certainly show the way than others, say, mathematics more than
aesthetics). As explained here, a good argument is relative to a person.
What might legitimately lead one person to a conclusion might not
lead another person to the same conclusion because so much depends
upon the person’s background beliefs. What a contemporary
philosopher or physicist would recognize as a good argument is often
not what an ancient Greek, even Plato, Aristotle, Ptolemy, or Euclid
would recognize. Also, there may be good arguments that the ancient
Greeks could recognize as good arguments that we could not. For
obvious reasons I can’t think of an example.
The notion of a “good argument” is an intuitive one. In this chapter I
want to make this intuitive notion progressively more precise by
considering the following definitions:
Df(1) An argument is a sequence of two or more
      propositions of which one is designated as the
      conclusion and all the others of which are premises.
Each of these definitions contains key technical terms and ideas that
need to be explained, including proposition and valid. Let’s begin by
looking at Df(1), the definition of argument. Notice that an argument
is characterized as a sequence of propositions. Although proposition
could be given a more technical formulation, for our purposes it is
enough for us to understand this term as equivalent to “a sentence (or
main clause) that has a truth-value;” that is, it is a sentence (or main
clause) that is either true or false. Propositions are sometimes
contrasted with questions and commands, which cannot be true or

=== p. 33 ===

false. Proposition is often used interchangeably with statement and
assertion even though the meanings of these words can be different in
important ways.1
Returning to the definition of argument, we should notice that an
argument is a sequence of propositions because the propositions are
supposed to be related in some logically significant way. One of these
propositions will be designated as the conclusion; that is, the
proposition that is to be proven. Within the context of an essay as a
whole, the conclusion is the thesis. Since subordinate propositions
within the essay may have to be proved, these subordinate
propositions may also be conclusions with their own sets of supporting
premises. The premises are the propositions that lead to the
conclusion. They provide the justification for the conclusion.
The above definition is abstract. Let’s make it a bit less so by
considering an extremely spare argument:

The first two sentences are premises. The third is the conclusion, as
indicated by the word therefore. The premises are supposed to provide
the rational force for accepting the conclusion. While this is a good
argument, it is rhetorically lame. No one would seriously argue for
such an obvious conclusion. It rarely happens that three simple
sentences constitute a rationally persuasive argument, which typically
requires elaboration and embellishment. Yet, at the beginning of our
study, it is wise to keep the matter as simple as possible.
The definition of argument in Df(1) is neutral with respect to the issue
of whether an argument is defective (bad) or not. Some arguments are
defective and some are not. Our goal is to understand the nature of all
arguments by concentrating on what constitutes a good one. We then
understand what a defective argument is by identifying how it fails to
measure up to the criteria for good arguments. As Parmenides said,
“The ways of falsehood are infinite, while the way of truth is one.”
To further refine the definition of a good argument, let’s now consider

=== p. 34 ===

the concept of a sound argument given in Df(2):
As this definition makes clear, there are two aspects to a sound
argument: validity and truth. An argument is unsound in either of two
cases: if it is invalid or if one or more of its premises are false. Thus, to
show that your argument is sound, you must show that the argument
is valid and show that the premises are true. Since a sound argument
is partially defined in terms of the technical notion of validity, we need
a definition of it:
To put this in a slightly more colloquial form, the conclusion of a valid
argument must be true whenever all its premises are true. The truth of
the premises guarantees the truth of the conclusion.
In Df(3), validity is defined in terms of truth and necessity. Further, in
Df(4) a cogent argument is partially defined in terms of a sound
argument; and a sound argument is partially defined in Df(2) in terms
of an argument; and an argument is partially defined in Df(1) as
consisting of premises and a conclusion. This process of defining one
thing in terms of other things cannot go on forever, no more than the
stability of the earth can be explained by saying that it sits on the back
of an elephant that rests on the back of another elephant, that rests on
the back of another elephant, ad infinitum. At some point, the process
of explanation must end. (Under all the elephants is a tortoise; and
that is the end of it.)
As regards validity (and hence soundness and cogency), the process of
explanation ends with truth and necessity. These two concepts are
being taken as basic and will not be defined. I am relying upon our
common understanding of the notions of truth and necessity to carry
us. This is not to say that these notions are not problematic; it is just
that one must stop somewhere. Cogency, soundness, and validity

=== p. 35 ===

could have been defined using some other terms and then some terms
other than truth and necessity would have been basic and undefined.
There is nothing objectionable in leaving some terms undefined.
Indeed, it is inescapable. In order to say anything, one must assume
that the meanings of some words are understood. (This may form the
foundation for a paradox involving how it is possible for people to
learn a language if one must already know words before one can say
anything; fortunately, such a possible paradox is not our problem
here.) In every enterprise, one eventually gets to a point at which
something must be accepted without definition or argument. If the
arguer and arguee cannot agree on any such point, there is a sense in
which an argument cannot get started. However, although neither
truth nor necessity will be defined, a little more can and will be said
about validity in section 2 of this chapter.
A sound argument is a valid argument with true premises. Yet, many
sound arguments are unhelpful because they are not recognizable as
good arguments. To incorporate the aspect of recognizability into our
intuitive notion of a good argument, we must introduce the idea of a
cogent argument, as spelled out in Df(4):
There are many reasons why a rational person might not recognize a
good argument. If its logical form is too complex for any human being
to recognize or the evidence needed to show that the premises are true
is simply not available, a sound argument would necessarily fail to be
cogent, because the condition of recognizability would be impossible
to satisfy. However, many sound arguments are, as a matter of fact,
not cogent because they are not properly formulated and/or adequate
evidence is not adduced in support of key premises. Proper
formulation of an argument involves its structure: the argument must
be valid and the premises and conclusion must be set out in such a
way that its validity is apparent. The matter of evidence, on the other
hand, is related to an argument’s content and involves once again the
notion of truth. Each individual premise must be true and the evidence

=== p. 36 ===

presented must make this clear.
The intuitive notion of a good argument that we started with at the
beginning of this chapter has now evolved into the notion of a cogent
argument. We can now summarize by saying that a good (i.e. cogent)
argument involves three things: formal validity (structure), true
premises (content), and recognizability. This is what you should strive
for in your writing. If any one of these elements is missing, your
argument will not be cogent. All of these elements are individually
necessary and jointly sufficient to produce a cogent argument. In
section 3 of this chapter we will examine the notion of cogency in more
detail. For now we need to return to a fuller treatment of the crucial
notion of validity, the aspect of an argument related to its structure or
form.

2 Valid Arguments
Recall the definition of a valid argument given in section 1:
To repeat what was said earlier, in a valid argument true premises
guarantee a true conclusion. A valid argument cannot have true
premises and a false conclusion. Validity preserves truth. The situation
is different when one or more of the premises is false. In such cases,
the conclusion might be true or false. In other words, there are valid
arguments that have
a. true premises and true conclusion;
b. false premises and false conclusion;
c. false premises and true conclusion.
Let’s look at an instance of each of these possibilities (for the sake of
illustration, exercise whatever tolerance necessary to assume that the
premises in the following examples are true or false as indicated).
  Example of a valid argument with true premises and a true

=== p. 37 ===

  conclusion
  Justice is fairness.
  Fairness is distributing rewards according to merit and penalties
  according to blame.

  Justice is distributing rewards according to merit and penalties
  according to blame.

  Example of a valid argument with false premises and a false
  conclusion
  Justice is what the strong desire.
  What the strong desire is what is good for the strong.

  Justice is what is good for the strong.

  Example of a valid argument with false premises and a true
  conclusion
  Justice is what the strong desire.
  What the strong desire is distributing rewards according to merit
  and penalties according to blame.

  Justice is distributing rewards according to merit and penalties
  according to blame.

In each of these examples of a valid argument, the conclusion is
related to the premises in a fairly straightforward way. This need not
be the case.
Although it is counterintuitive, there are valid arguments in which the
premises and conclusion are not related in any plausible way. There
are two types of valid arguments in which the conclusion is wholly
unrelated to the premises. One type occurs when the conclusion is a

=== p. 38 ===

tautology, that is, a trivially true proposition, that is, a true
proposition that is by its nature uninformative. Consider the
statement, “Either Aristotle is a great philosopher or he is not.” Since
this proposition is trivially true, there can be no argument with true
premises and it as a false conclusion, no matter how irrelevant the
premises are to that conclusion. For example, the argument

is valid, even though the premise has no apparent topical or evidential
relation to the conclusion. This argument is defective and hence not
cogent. Yet, it is a valid argument.
The other type of valid argument with topically unrelated premises
and conclusion is one which contains contradictory premises.
(Roughly, a proposition is contradictory when it asserts and denies the
same thing, e.g. “Aristotle is a great philosopher and he is not a great
philosopher.”) For example, consider this argument:

This argument is valid because it satisfies the definition of validity
even though the conclusion is unrelated to the premise. When an
argument contains a contradictory premise, then that premise is
necessarily false, and hence it is not possible for all the premises to be
true and the conclusion false. More generally, even if there is no single
contradictory premise, so long as the premises are jointly
contradictory, the argument is valid.
Many people consciously believe contradictory propositions, and
sometimes think that there is some merit in doing so. In “Song of
Myself,” Walt Whitman wrote, “Do I contradict myself? Very well then
I contradict myself. (I am large, I contain multitudes.)” That makes for
good poetry but bad philosophy. Ralph Waldo Emerson wrote, “A
foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds,” and this has led
some people to think that there is a wise inconsistency. The
philosopher Hegel thought that contradictions were an indispensable
part of philosophy. So what is wrong with having contradictory

=== p. 39 ===

beliefs? The simple answer is that a person with contradictory beliefs
is logically committed to every proposition that exists. This is bad
because true (empirical) beliefs do not just mark off the part of
conceptual space that is factual; they exclude the parts of conceptual
space that are nonfactual. Contradictory beliefs make all beliefs
equally good.
Since beliefs are propositions, I will illustrate the problem with
contradictions by taking advantage of the fact that contradictory
premises entail any and all propositions. The valid argument below
uses the contradictory premise that Horses fly and horses do not fly
and proves that you are a serial killer; but it should be obvious that
any other contradictory premise and any other offensive false
conclusion can be substituted for them respectively.

People sometimes find the above kind of proof “fishy” and
unpersuasive, even though the form of the argument is valid:

A person who believes contradictory propositions usually does not
realize that she does; and she may draw what she believes are
interesting consequences from her contradictory beliefs. But since
anything can be proved from contradictory premises, the
consequences she draws are actually not interesting.
Let’s now say more about the fact that in a valid argument, the
premises entail the conclusion. Upon what does entailment depend?

=== p. 40 ===

One answer is that entailment depends upon the meanings of the
words making up the propositions of the argument. Two types of
words might be distinguished: topic neutral and topic specific.
Topic specific words include those that are typically first thought of as
words, such as dog, cat, walks, yellow, happily, as well as more
emotionally charged words such as disarmament, deficit, abortion,
and fraternity. What all these words have in common is that they
specify or restrict some topic. A sentence with the word dog in it, for
example, in some very general sense, might be said to have a dog or
dogs as one of its topics. The logic that is concerned with the
entailment properties of topic specific words might be called material
logic. Thus, material logic is concerned with the entailment that holds
between
  This object is yellow
and
  This object is colored.
Topic specific words that are very general or central to our conceptual
scheme, e.g. goodness, truth, justice, beauty, person, object, are the
traditional topics of philosophy, and the study of their contribution to
the entailments of propositions is largely what philosophy is about.
Thus, a philosopher might worry about the nature of knowledge by
asking whether
  x knows that p
entails
  x believes that p.
And he might worry about the nature of truth by asking whether
  “S” is true
entails
  “S” corresponds to some fact.
When philosophers formulate questions or pose problems in terms of

=== p. 41 ===

whether one thing entails another, they may be involved in a very
traditional philosophical pursuit.
Let’s now consider some topic neutral words. Not, and, or, if . . . then,
if and only if, all, and some, are topic neutral in the sense that they do
not restrict the topic or subject matter under discussion. Further, they
are not restricted with regard to what topic specific words they can
combine with to form sentences. The logic that is concerned with the
entailment properties of topic neutral words is called formal logic. For
example, each of these arguments is valid for the same reason:
  If John is rich, then Mary is happy.

  If smoking causes lung cancer, then people should not smoke.

  If humans are aggressive by nature, then a strong government is
  needed to protect humans from themselves.

It does not matter that each of these arguments concerns a different
topic. Given the meaning of if . . . then, any argument of this form is
valid:

where “p” and “q” represent propositions. Recall that propositions are
sentences or main clauses that have a truth-value. This is important
because a mistake in representing an argument can occur if certain
words or phrases are translated as if they expressed a complete
thought. The sentence:
  Lee is standing and Sam is standing.

=== p. 42 ===

is a “conjunction” and expresses two propositions, “Lee is standing”
and “Sam is standing.” It might be represented as “(L and S)” or “(p
and q).” Colloquially, we would say, “Lee and Sam are standing.” This
latter sentence expresses the same conjunction, and so could be
represented in the same way, as, say, “(L and S).” “L” translates “Lee is
standing;” it does not translate “Lee,” which is a proper name, not a
sentence or main clause. Contrast these cases with
   Adam and Beth stood together.
This sentence does not express a conjunction even though it contains
the word “and.” It is not colloquial for “Adam stood together” and
“Beth stood together.” So it would be a mistake to translate it as, say,
“(A and B).”
The form of argument we have been looking at above is one of the
most intuitive argument forms there is. It is called modus ponens,
which loosely translated means the mode of affirming. Modus ponens
is one of a number of inference forms that constitute the core of
natural deduction systems of propositional logic. Roughly,
propositional logic, sometimes called the propositional calculus, can
be defined as the logic of some uses of not, and, or, if . . . then and if
and only if. These words figure crucially in some of the most basic
forms of argumentation that people use. Here, they are presented
schematically:

=== p. 43 ===

Logic typically includes special symbols for the most important topic
neutral words. There is no one set of symbols that is used by a majority
of logicians. Different logicians use different symbols for the same
topic neutral words. Here are some examples:
      Propositional Connective Symbol Symbol Symbol
      not                      ∼      ¬      –
      and                      &      .      ∧
      or                       V             ∨
      if . . . then            ⊃             →
      if and only if           ≡             ↔
If the symbols in the first column are substituted for their English
equivalents, then the argument forms just presented look like this:

=== p. 44 ===

Since these forms are of their very nature abstract, it may be helpful to
give an example of each of them. Let’s begin with modus ponens:
  If Hobbes is an empiricist, then Hobbes holds that sense knowledge
  is the foundation for all knowledge.

Let’s now consider an instance of modus tollens, which bears some
similarity to modus ponens.
  If Hobbes is an empiricist, then Hobbes holds that sense knowledge
  is the foundation for all knowledge.

Modus ponens and modus tollens are clearly related. Often a
philosophical problem can be summarized as a dispute over whether
the sound argument concerning a certain issue should be formulated
as a modus ponens or a modus tollens argument. One could imagine a
dispute involving the argument examples above. One person might be

=== p. 45 ===

using the modus ponens argument to prove that Hobbes emphasizes
the importance of observation in science. His opponent might use the
modus tollens argument to prove that Hobbes is not an empiricist.
There is a saying in philosophy: One person’s modus ponens is
another person’s modus tollens. Obviously much more would be
involved in the debate than merely these two arguments. Although
both arguments are fairly obviously valid, it is not obvious which, if
either, is sound, and hence neither argument is cogent. As a matter of
fact, the instance of modus tollens is the sound argument, and could
form the core of a cogent argument if it were buttressed with evidence
showing that Hobbes himself emphasized the deductive and a priori
aspects of science.
  Let’s now consider an example of disjunctive syllogism:
  Either Hobbes is an empiricist or he is a rationalist.

This argument is of course valid. Is it sound? A frequent defect of
arguments that have the form of disjunctive syllogism is that not all
the relevant alternatives are specified in the disjunctive proposition. If
the disjunctive proposition does not exhaust all the possibilities, then
it may well be false. For example, is every philosopher either an
empiricist or a rationalist? Isn’t it possible for a philosopher to be
neither? A large part of this issue will depend upon how the terms
empiricist and rationalist are defined. So, if our example of a
disjunctive syllogism has any hope of forming the core of a cogent
argument, it is necessary to define those terms even though this alone
would not suffice (see chapter 5, section 1, “Definitions”).
Hypothetical syllogisms are often used to line up series of
dependencies, for example,

=== p. 46 ===

Although the formal rule of a syllogism dictates that there be only two
premises, as in the above example, several hypothetical syllogisms can,
however, be strung together to yield a result like this:
  If every event is causally determined, then every human action is
  causally determined.
  If no human action is free, then no human is responsible for any of
  his actions.

When propositions are linked in this sort of way and the conclusion is
either counterintuitive or otherwise unacceptable, the challenge lies in
determining where and how to break the chain.
Let’s now consider the two rules of dilemma. Constructive dilemma
might be thought of as two instances of modus ponens connected:

Similarly, destructive dilemma might be thought of as two instances of
modus tollens connected:

Let’s now consider an example of each, beginning with constructive
dilemma:

=== p. 47 ===

  If determinism is true, then actions are neutral with respect to
  praise or blame; and if humans have free will, then science is
  limited in what it can explain about reality.

Just as one person’s modus ponens is another person’s modus tollens,
one person’s constructive dilemma is another person’s destructive
dilemma. The above example of constructive dilemma is easily
transmuted into an example of destructive dilemma:
  If determinism is true, then human actions are neutral with respect
  to praise or blame; and if humans have free will, then science is
  limited in what it can explain about reality.

Genuine philosophical examples of dilemmas typically conclude with a
disjunction of unpleasant alternatives. That is what makes the
argument a dilemma in the ordinary sense of the term, in contrast
with the logical sense we have been discussing. Dilemmas will be
discussed again in chapter 5.
Now that we have a better understanding of what constitutes a valid
argument form, let’s return to the main issue of this chapter, namely,
what makes up a cogent argument.

3 Cogent Arguments
Recall the definition of a cogent argument in section 1:
(Df4) A cogent argument is a sound argument that is
A cogent argument is one that compels the audience to accept its
conclusion in virtue of his recognition that the argument is valid and

=== p. 48 ===

the premises true. Cogent arguments are person relative. This would
come out more clearly if we reformulated our definition like this:

An argument is cogent for an audience just in case that
audience recognizes it to be sound.
The same argument might be cogent to one person and not cogent to
another. All cogent arguments are persuasive to the audience that
recognizes them. Yet not all persuasive arguments are cogent. People
are often persuaded by bad arguments and fallacious reasoning.
An argument may be sound, and yet fail to be cogent because its
soundness is not recognized. An argument might be this way
necessarily, either through the complexity of form that outstrips
human comprehension or through the impossibility of gathering
evidence needed to show that its premises are true. We are not really
interested in these non-cogent arguments, since there is nothing
humans can do about them. If humans cannot recognize the validity,
and the evidence is in no way available, then that is the end of it.
These arguments, however, should not be confused with others.
There are also some sound arguments that are in fact not recognized
as such either because (1) although their logical structures are not
recognized, they could be if they were explained, or because (2)
although their premises are not recognized as true, they could be if the
evidence which is available were provided. About these kinds of
unrecognized sound arguments something can be done: the author
can explain their logical structures and provide the evidence for their
premises.
All of this can be made clearer with an example. There is no doubt that
it is easy to provide a sound argument for the proposition “God exists”
(if He does exist). And there is no doubt that it is easy to provide a
sound argument for the proposition, “God does not exist” (if He does
not exist). Thus, one (but only one) of the following two arguments is
sound.
  First Argument
  Either God exists or June 1 is Independence Day.

=== p. 49 ===

   Second Argument
   Either God does not exist or June 1 is Independence Day.

Now it should be obvious that neither of these arguments is cogent
even though one of them is sound. The problem is that the sound
argument, whichever one it is, is not making itself known! Each
argument is clearly valid. Both are instances of disjunctive syllogism.
And the second premise of each argument is true. The locus of the
problem is the first premise. If God exists, then the first premise of the
First Argument is true in virtue of that very fact; and then the First
Argument is sound. If God does not exist, then the first premise of the
Second Argument is true in virtue of that very fact, and then the
Second Argument is sound. But which is it?
Unfortunately, there is nothing in either argument that allows us to
determine which is sound. There is nothing in either argument that
rationally forces us to accept its first premise. Thus, neither argument
is cogent. It is the author’s duty to forge sound arguments into cogent
arguments. Typically, this requires elaboration: either explanation of
the argument’s validity or evidence for the truth of the premises.
How might an author try to strengthen one of the above arguments?
Although I will usually try to give examples of how to do things
correctly, in this case, I will explain how things might go wrong. One
can also learn from one’s mistakes.
Since the same sort of strategies would apply to either argument, let’s
consider just the first one. What the First Argument needs is evidence
that is sufficient to establish that the first premise is true. What kind of
evidence would accomplish this goal? The premise is a disjunctive
proposition. As such, it is true if either disjunct is true. We already
know that the second disjunct is false. Thus, if the premise is true, it
must be because its first disjunct is true. But that disjunct “God exists”
is identical with the conclusion. Thus, any evidence for the truth of the

=== p. 50 ===

premise is eo ipso evidence for the truth of the conclusion. What this
means is that evidence for the premise is superfluous. If one had
evidence for the proposition “God exists,” then one could apply it
immediately to the conclusion without relying on the premises at all.
Suppose someone wanted to defend the cogency of this argument by
claiming that the first premise is true because “God exists” is true and
that “God exists” is true because it is self-evident. This defense does
not work. It begs the question. That is, the purpose of the argument is
to prove that God exists. But the defender wants to assume that very
thing to be self-evident.
“Begging the question” is the fallacy of using a proposition both as the
conclusion and as either a premise or as expressing evidence for a
premise. Here is a blatant example of begging the question:

No one is going to be misled by this argument. Most instances of the
fallacy of begging the question, like all fallacies, are more subtle.
Sometimes the fallacy occurs when the same proposition is expressed
in two verbally different ways. For example, to argue

is to beg the question since the premise and the conclusion mean the
same.
A more complex and interesting example of begging the question is
this:
  Whatever the Bible says is true. For the Bible is the Word of God,
  and the Word of God is true. Further, we know the Word of God is
  true because the Bible tells us so.
The basic argument is this:
  The Bible is the Word of God.

=== p. 51 ===

The premise, “The Word of God is true,” needs to be supported by
evidence. But to use “The Bible says so” (that is, “The Bible is true”) as
expressing that evidence is to beg the question. For, in this context,
“The Bible says so” is another way of saying “The Bible is true,” which
is just what is supposed to be proved. Thus, it cannot be used either as
a premise or as evidence for a premise.
What then makes a cogent argument recognizable? I suggest that it
involves relevance and informativeness. A cogent argument contains
premises that are relevant to the conclusion. Thus, the arguments
about the existence of God that were discussed above are not cogent
because not all their premises were relevant to the conclusions. (It’s
notoriously difficult to explain or define relevance.) A cogent
argument must also contain premises that are informative. Sometimes
premises are informative if they are novel in the sense that the
audience was not aware of them until they were seen in the argument.
Sometimes premises are informative in a derivative way; they can be
informative if the evidence presented for them is novel. Thus, it may
not be informative for someone solely to assert, “I exist.” Standing
alone, it seems trivial. But, when a philosopher like Descartes points
out that evidence for this proposition can be found even in the most
radically deceptive thoughts that a person can have, then the
proposition “I exist” becomes informative in a way it otherwise isn’t. It
is also informative in its further use in argumentation against
skepticism and for the existence of God. Finally, sometimes premises
are informative, not because they are individually novel, but because
they are organized in a novel way; and the recognition of a novel
organization of already known facts can be instructive. In Plato’s
Meno, Socrates gets a slave boy to deduce an astonishing variety of
geometrical theorems by beginning with facts the boy already knows.
Socrates attributes the boy’s surprising knowledge to a reminiscence of
knowledge the boy had in an existence prior to his birth. An alternative
explanation is that Socrates led the boy to reorganize the knowledge
that the boy acquired during his existence on earth, and in
reorganizing this knowledge he came to know many more things.

=== p. 52 ===

Notice that I have not supplied an example of a cogent argument in
this section. A trivially cogent argument would not be instructive. And
since my audience is diverse, it would be difficult to construct a
nontrivial example in less than several pages. I leave the discovery of a
cogent argument to each reader, as an exercise.
The upshot of the chapter to this point is that the notion of a sound
argument does not fully capture the intuitive notion of a good
argument. We need an idea that takes into account that the argument’s
soundness is recognized, and that is what the idea of a cogent
argument does.

4 Quantification and Modality
People sometimes talk about things in general and sometimes about
only some things, for example, “Every politician lies,” “Some [or: a
few] politicians lie,” “No politicians lie,” and “Some [or: a few]
politicians don’t lie.” Intuitively, people usually make the right
inferences relative to such “quantified” sentences. But it is helpful to
have a precise description of the logical connections between words
like “all” and “some.” A complete description would be complicated
and take a lot of space. But it is worthwhile to have a rudimentary idea
of these connections. The first thing that we need to do is to specify
what forms of sentences will be discussed. Following Aristotle, we will
take as our examples, sentences that have these forms:
  All Fs are Gs, Some Fs are Gs, No Fs are G, and Some Fs are not Gs,
where ‘F’ and ‘G’ can be replaced by most nouns and noun phrases.
None of the examples of “quantified” sentences given above have these
forms. But it is easy to paraphrase them, so that they do: “All
politicians are liars,” “Some politicians are liars,” and so on. (While
people who tell only one or a few small lies are usually not considered
liars, we are going to assume here that all it takes is one lie to be a
liar.)
The logical connections that apply to sentences of the form mentioned
above are set out in what is known as the square of opposition:

=== p. 53 ===

                      The Square of Opposition

Examples of A-sentences2 are “All lawyers are educated people,” “All
good students are people who study hard,” “All liberals are
communists.” (Some of the preceding statements are true and some
false; and the same is true of the sample sentences that follow. Their
actual truth-values are irrelevant to their logic.) While the sentences
“All lawyers have a lot of knowledge,” “Every good student studies
hard,” and “If someone is a liberal, she believes in communism” are
not strictly A-sentences, they can be paraphrased as A-sentences.
Examples of I-sentences are: “Some lawyers are officers of the court,”
“Some good students are people who study,” and so on.
Examples of E-sentences are: “No lawyers are educated people,” “No
good students are people who study hard,” “No liberals are
communists.” And while the sentences, “No lawyers have a lot of
knowledge” and “None who are good students study hard” are not E-sentences, it is obvious that they can be paraphrased into the form of
E-sentences.
Examples of O-sentences are “Some lawyers are not educated people,”
“Some good students are not people who study hard,” and “Some
liberals are not communists.” And while “A few lawyers are not
educated people” and “Not all good students study hard” and “Many
liberals are not communists” are not strictly O-sentences, it is obvious
that they can be paraphrased into O-sentences.
A presupposition of the logic of these sentences is that there are actual
instances of Fs and Gs. So given that unicorns do not exist, the square
of opposition does not describe the logic of a sentence like “Some

=== p. 54 ===

unicorns have two horns.”
We can now state the principal logical relations between these four
types of sentences:
a. A-sentences entail their corresponding I-sentences.
b. E-sentences entail their corresponding O-sentences.
c. Corresponding A- and O-sentences are contradictory.
d. Corresponding E- and I-sentences are contradictory.
e. Not both an A-sentence and its corresponding E-sentence can be
f. Both an I-sentence and an O-sentence can be true together.

  1. For (a) above, give an example of an A-sentence that is true and
     then another example in which the A-sentence is false.
  2. For (b) above, give an example of an E-sentence that is true and
     then another example in which the E-sentence is false.
  3. Do you know what the truth-value is of the corresponding I-and O-sentences of exercises (1) and (2) above. (Answer this for
     all eight(!) I- and O-sentences.)
  4. Give one example of (d), and one of (e), and one of (f).
  5. Does the sentence, “Some dogs are mammals” entail “All dogs
     are mammals”?
  6. Does the sentence, “Some women are lawyers” entail “Some
     women are not lawyers”?

In addition to inventing the square of opposition, Aristotle noticed
that similar logical connections are related to many sentences that
include the words and phrases, “necessarily,” “possibly,” “necessarily
not,” and “possibly not.” In the diagram below, the symbol “” stands
for “necessarily,” “it is necessary that,” and “must,” and some other

=== p. 55 ===

locutions too. Your knowledge of English is a generally reliable guide
about when necessity is being expressed. The symbol “ ” stands for
“possibly,” “it is possible that,” “can,” and others. The symbol “∼”
indicates something expressing negation.
                  The Modal Square of Opposition

An important difference between the square of opposition and the
modal square of opposition is that the propositions do not have to be
categorical propositions. This fact is represented by the use of “p.” It
stands for complete sentences, just as it did when the logic of “not,”
“and,” “or,” and other sentence connectives were discussed.
Here are the principal logical relations between sentences in the modal
square:
a. ∗A-sentences entail their corresponding ∗I-sentences.
b. ∗E-sentences entail their corresponding ∗O-sentences.
c. Corresponding ∗A- and ∗O-sentences are contradictory.
d. Corresponding ∗E- and ∗I-sentences are contradictory.
e. Not both an *A-sentence and its corresponding ∗E-sentence can be
f. An *I-sentence and an ∗O-sentence can both be true together.
Here are some instances of (a) through (c):
a. (a′ ) “Necessarily two plus two equals four” entails “It is possible
   that two plus two equals four.”
b. (b′ ) “Necessarily it is not the case that two plus two equals four”

=== p. 56 ===

   entails “Possibly it is not the case that two plus two equals four.”
   [Of course the two sentences mentioned in this example are
   actually false.]
c. (c′ ) “Necessarily two plus two equals four” and “Possibly it is not
   the case that two plus two equals four” are contradictory.

 Give an instance of (d) through (f).

One reason that necessity and possibility are so important to
philosophy is that traditionally philosophy, in contrast with ordinary
truths about the world or scientific truths, aimed to identify what is
necessarily true, that is, what must be the case; and it also aimed to
identify what was possibly the case because, by knowing what is
possible, one identifies the outer boundaries of a concept.
So far, necessity and possibility have been discussed as if they had one
sense. In fact, it is important to distinguish two senses of them. The
first is logical or metaphysical necessity. Examples (a′ )–(c′ ) illustrate
this kind of necessity. It has nothing to do with human knowledge. The
other sense of necessity and possibility, epistemic, is intimately
connected with what people know. If someone says, “It is possible that
the president is currently in her office,” and is using the epistemic
sense of “possible,” he is saying in effect, “I have no knowledge that
leads me to believe that she is not in her office.” If someone says, “She
must be in her office,” in the epistemic sense of “must,” he is saying in
effect, “I have conclusive proof that she is in her office.”
While it is difficult to explain rigorously what logical necessity and
possibility are without using technical notions, it is easy to explain
what they mean in relation to each other. For example,
    p = ∼ ∼p “Necessarily p” is logically equivalent to “It is not possible
   that it is not the case that p.”
    p = ∼ ∼p “Possibly p” is logically equivalent to “It is not the case
   that necessarily it is not the case that p.”

=== p. 57 ===

In the three sections that follow, several other logical concepts will be
explained: consistency and contradiction in section 5, contraries and
contradictories in section 6, and the strength of a proposition in
section 7.
I have presented nothing more than the most basic information about
logic. A detailed presentation of simple deductive and informal logic is
contained in Lewis Vaugn’s The Power of Critical Thinking, 4th edn.
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2013). Similarly, the examples of
arguments that I have used have been like skeletons of the kind of
argument you will find in philosophy in order to make it easier to
understand the particular point that I wanted to convey. Genuine
philosophical arguments are often difficult to identify in their original
context. A superb book that makes the transition from considering
bare bones arguments to the fully elaborated and often difficult
arguments of professional philosophers is Just the Arguments: 100 of
the Most Important Arguments in Western Philosophy, ed. Michael
Bruce and Steven Barbone (Malden, MA: Wiley Blackwell, 2011). The
authors of the individual arguments describe the argument
discursively, but then explicitly identify the premises and the inference
steps that lead to the conclusion.

5 Consistency and Contradiction
We have been talking about good and bad arguments. But people also
care a great deal about the logical properties of clusters or sets of

=== p. 58 ===

propositions. For example, the propositions, “George Washington was
the first president of the United States” and “Abraham Lincoln was the
sixteenth president of the United States” are consistent with each
other. Both of them can be true at the same time and in fact they are
both true. Consistent propositions may be on the same or a related
topic as the sentences about Washington and Lincoln are. But they
may also be on completely unrelated topics, e.g. “George Washington
was the first president of the United States” and “A friend of Turgenev
gave him the idea for Fathers and Sons.” One sentence is about the
history of the United States, the other about a Russian literary figure.
They are consistent with each other even though they are topically
unrelated.
Propositions can be consistent with each other even if one, some, or all
of them, are false. The sentence about Turgenev is false but
nonetheless consistent with the sentence about Washington, which is
Here is a set of sentences that are consistent and all of which are false:
  Aristotle discovered America.
  Descartes failed his college course in geometry.
  Henry Ford signed the Declaration of Independence.
  The Cleveland Indians won the 1995 World Series.
As this example shows, consistency is not a guarantee of truth. It is
possible for propositions to be consistent with each other, yet not true.
Still, it is important for propositions to be consistent. For if
propositions are not consistent with each other (that is, if they are
inconsistent, that is, contradictory), then one of them has to be false.
And philosophers, and non-philosophers, should avoid falsity like the
plague.
The easiest sets of inconsistent propositions to identify are those that
contain a proposition and its negation:
  Turgenev is a novelist.
  Turgenev is not a novelist.

=== p. 59 ===

It is not necessary to know anything about Turgenev to know that at
least one of these propositions is false. The fact that at least one
proposition in an inconsistent set must be false is an interesting
feature and one that philosophers often exploit. They often try to
formulate sets of propositions, each of which seems true, but which
are together inconsistent. Such sets of propositions are called
paradoxes.
   The Paradox of Freedom and Causality
   1. All events are caused.
   2. Human actions are events.
   3. Some human actions are free, that is, not caused.
   The Paradox of Reference and Existence
   1. Everything referred to must exist.
   2. The name “Hamlet” refers to Hamlet.
   3. Hamlet does not exist.
   The Paradox of Promising
   1. If a person promises to do something, then he has an obligation
      to do it.
   2. If a person has an obligation to do something, then he can do it.
   3. Some people sometimes make promises that they cannot keep.
Formulating a philosophical problem as a paradox helps focus the
issue. Anyone purporting to solve the problem must say which of the
propositions she thinks is false, and why; or she must explain why she
thinks that all the propositions are in fact consistent, that is, how it is
possible for all of them to be true even though they may not look
consistent.
It is not always easy to tell whether propositions that appear to be
inconsistent with each other actually are. This is especially true when
the seemingly inconsistent propositions are vague, as
   British empiricists believed that minds exist.

=== p. 60 ===

   British empiricists believed that minds do not exist.
It is not clear whether these sentences are inconsistent or not. The
reason is that it is not clear whether either sentence is talking about all
British empiricists or just some of them. If each sentence is talking
about all British empiricists, then the sentences are inconsistent. But if
each is talking about some British empiricists, then the sentences
express consistent propositions; and in fact would both be true. My
own view is that when sentences are vague, it should be said that they
do not express a proposition at all; that they express only part of a
thought. Since they do not express a complete proposition, they do not
have a truth-value and are neither true nor false. This means that they
cannot be consistent or inconsistent with each other.
So far I have given examples of consistent and inconsistent sets of
propositions that have contained at least two propositions. But these
notions also apply to individual propositions. The proposition
   Aristotle was a poet
is consistent because it is possible for it to be true, even though it is in
fact false. And the proposition
   Aristotle was a poet and Aristotle was not a poet
is inconsistent because it is impossible for it to be true. Inconsistent
propositions are also called contradictions.
Consistency and inconsistency (contradiction) are obviously related
ideas. Although it might not be obvious, they are also related to
entailment. A proposition p entails a proposition q just in case p is
inconsistent with not q.

  1. Choose one of the paradoxes above and explain why the
     propositions expressed in it are inconsistent.
  2. Are the following two propositions consistent or inconsistent
     with each other? Assume that there are some British
     empiricists.

=== p. 61 ===

 All British empiricists believe that the mind is a substance.
 Some British empiricists believe that the mind is a substance.

6 Contraries and Contradictories
In the last section, contradiction was defined in relation to
consistency. A contradiction is a proposition that is inconsistent; and a
contradictory set of propositions is a set of propositions that are
together inconsistent. Contradiction can be defined in other ways,
ways that do not mention inconsistency:
A (self-)contradiction is a proposition that cannot be true.
A set of propositions is contradictory just in case there is no
way to make all of them true.
For example, “Socrates is mortal and Socrates is not mortal” is
contradictory; and the set of (two) propositions, “Socrates is mortal”
and “Socrates is not mortal” is contradictory.
For the purpose of contrasting contradictions with contraries, it is
convenient to restrict the discussion to pairs of propositions (I am
assuming that each of the propositions is not analytic and not
contradictory):
  Two propositions are contradictory just in case one must be true
  and one must be false.
  Two propositions are contrary just in case they cannot both be true
  (and neither is analytic nor contradictory).
These two propositions contradict each other:
  The wall is blue.
  The wall is not blue.
These two propositions are contraries:
  The wall is (completely) blue.
  The wall is (completely) red.

=== p. 62 ===

Although two contrary propositions cannot both be true, it is possible
for both of them to be false. If the wall is yellow, then both of the
propositions displayed immediately above are false.
It should be obvious that we can extend the idea of contradictions and
contraries to predicates or properties (I am assuming that each
predicate is neither analytic nor contradictory):
  Two properties are contradictory just in case one must be true of an
  object and one must be false of it.
  Two properties are contrary just in case they cannot both be true of
  an object (and they are not contradictory).
Being blue/being non-blue are contradictory properties. Being
blue/being red are contrary properties.
The distinction between contraries and contradictories is important
because they are often mistaken. Although it is unlikely that you will
mistake being red and being blue for contradictory properties, you
might mistake being rich and being poor as contradictory, or being
generous and being stingy. Also it is easy to confuse being unjust (a
contrary of being just) with being not just (its contradictory). A
cabbage growing in a garden is not just but it is not unjust either.
Some philosophers have used the observation that being just and
being unjust are contraries and not contradictories to help solve the
problem of evil. Here is an example of that in an essay fragment:

         A SOLUTION TO THE PROBLEM OF EVIL
 The problem of evil is insoluble until and unless one realizes that
 justice and injustice are contrary terms and that neither one
 applies to God. To be just is to be subject to laws and to follow all
 of those laws that apply. To be unjust is to be subject to laws and
 not to follow all of those that apply. But God is neither just nor
 unjust because He is not subject to any law. In order to be subject
 to law, one must not have control over it. But God has complete
 control over law since He makes all of the laws and is subject to no
 constraint with regard to the content of those laws. That is part of

=== p. 63 ===

 what is meant both by the omnipotence and the absolute
 sovereignty of God. That is why God was not unjust when He told
 Abraham to kill his son Isaac and not unjust when He allowed
 Satan to torture Job. Since God can be neither just nor unjust but
 makes the laws that determine who will be, it is appropriate to say
 that He is above justice and injustice.
 But what else should we say about God with respect to justice and
 injustice? Since every property has a contradictory and at least one
 property of each contradictory pair of properties is true of an
 object, the properties contradictory to being just and being unjust
 must be true of God. Consequently, God is not just and not unjust.

Let’s consider one last pair of terms. Subjectivity and objectivity are
often simply assumed to be contradictories. Whether they are
contraries or contradictories depends upon how they are defined. One
way to guarantee that they are contradictories is to define one of them
as not being the other. For example,
x is subjective if and only if x can be judged by only one
person and on the basis of her immediate experience.
x is objective if and only if x is not subjective.
So defined, subjectivity and objectivity are contradictory. But
sometimes both are defined independently of each other, such that
they turn out to be contraries that are mistaken for contradictories.

x is subjective if and only if x can be judged by only one
person and on the basis of her immediate experience.
x is objective if and only if x is publicly observable.
For example, abstract entities like truth, justice, government, numbers
(not to be confused with numerals), and some physical entities like
subatomic particles (only the effects of which can be seen) are neither
subjective nor objective by the above definitions (see, further, chapter
5, section 1, “Definitions”).

=== p. 64 ===

1. Which pairs of the following propositions are contradictories,
   which are contraries, and which are neither?
   a. All women are lawyers.
   b. No women are lawyers.
   c. Some women are lawyers.
   d. Some women are not lawyers.
   e. Some women are philosophers.
2. Is the following pair of propositions contradictory, contrary, or
   neither? Why?
   snow is white; coal is black or not black.
3. Which pairs of the following propositions are contradictories,
   which are contraries, and which are neither? (This exercise
   appeals to your intuitions about the ideas of necessity and
   possibility. Something is said about these ideas later in the
   chapter.)
   a. (Necessarily, all women are lawyers.
   b. Necessarily, no women are lawyers.
   c. Possibly, some women are lawyers.
   d. Possibly, some women are not lawyers.
   e. Probably, some women are lawyers.
4. Categorize the following pairs as contraries, contradictories, or
   neither:
   a. tall/short
   b. tall/non-tall
   c. just/merciful
   d. just/unjust

=== p. 65 ===

     e. red/tall
      f. rubber/iron
     g. merciful/unmerciful
     h. all-powerful/powerful
      i. happy/unhappy
      j. responsible/irresponsible
     k. lawful/unlawful
      l. male/female
    m. male/non-male
     n. Democrat/Republican
     o. poor/honest
  5. Given the definitions below, are subjectivity/objectivity
     contraries or contradictories?
     x is subjective if and only if there is only one person
     who can experience x.
     x is objective if and only if the properties of x can be
     determined by more than one person.

7 The Strength of a Proposition
Philosophers often talk about the strength of a proposition. Some
propositions are stronger and some are weaker than others. These
notions of strength and weakness are technical ones and need to be
defined. Although the definitions are not difficult – they require only
that you understand the notion of entailment – without these
definitions you would be surprised at what philosophers think about
the strength or weakness of a proposition.
A proposition p is stronger than a proposition q if and only
if p entails q and q does not entail p.
For example, “Most British empiricists believe that the mind is a

=== p. 66 ===

substance” is stronger than “Some British empiricists believe that the
mind is a substance.”
A proposition p is weaker than a proposition q if and only if
p does not entail q and q does entail p.
Obviously, “Some British empiricists believe that the mind is a
substance” is weaker than “Most British empiricists believe that the
mind is a substance.” Two propositions are equally strong if each
entails the other.
There are many propositions that cannot be compared with regard to
strength, for example, “Plato was a philosopher” and “David Hume
was a philosopher.” Neither proposition entails the other. Thus, one is
neither stronger nor weaker than the other. Further, although “Every
Greek philosopher had an ethical theory” may sound stronger than “It
is possible that some philosopher at some time believed some true
proposition,” in fact it is not, since it does not entail the latter. This
does not mean that these two propositions are equally easy or difficult
to prove. Indeed, the former would be more difficult to prove, or
would at least require much more evidence since it is making a claim
about all Greek philosophers, while the latter is making a claim about
some philosopher. Moreover, the evidence for each would be different.
If one proposition is stronger than another, then it requires more or
better evidence to prove it; but if they cannot be related to each other
in terms of strength, then there is no general way of predicting which
proposition will require more or better evidence.
It is important for you to know how strong propositions are for several
reasons. You need to know how strong each of your premises needs to
be in order to prove your case. Premises should not be stronger than
you need them to be, because the stronger they are the more evidence
they require and typically the more difficult they are to prove. The
weaker the proposition, the less evidence one is required to supply.
But your premises should also not be too weak, because if they are,
then they will not entail your conclusion. Your argument will be
invalid. Further, if you try to prove something stronger than is
necessary and fail, then either you or your audience may draw the false
inference that your position is untenable, even though a weaker set of

=== p. 67 ===

premises might have been sufficient to entail your conclusion.
Sometimes discovering that something can be proved using a weaker
proposition can be a great philosophical discovery. Many philosophers
have tried to prove the existence of God by using as a premise,
“Something is in motion.” John Duns Scotus, in the late thirteenth
century, made a brilliant move when he constructed a proof that uses
the weaker proposition “It is possible that something is in motion.”
This proposition is true so long as the idea of motion does not contain
a contradiction. This proposition might be true even if what humans
consider motion were an illusion and there were no actual motion in
the world. Thus, this proposition has fewer presuppositions than the
stronger proposition, “Something is in motion.”
Suppose you want to write in favor of skepticism. For our purposes,
let’s say that it is the view that no human knows anything. Then it is
important to decide (know?!) which of the following propositions you
need to prove or provide evidence for:
1. Each belief humans have is dubious.
2. Each belief humans have might be dubious.
3. Each belief humans have is false.
4. Each belief humans have might be false.
Proposition 2 is weaker than 1; 4 is weaker than 3. (Is 3 weaker than
2? Is 2 weaker than 4?) A philosopher is in a better initial position if he
can get away with proving the weaker of two propositions.
It is also important to know how strong your opponent’s proposition
is. If your opponent asserts “All British empiricists believe that the
mind is a substance,” then he is asserting something quite strong. This
means that his position can be refuted by establishing a relatively
weak proposition: “Some British empiricist does not believe that the
mind is a substance.” Thus, it would be sufficient for you to show that
there is at least one person, for example, David Hume, who is a British
empiricist who did not believe that the mind is a substance. On the
other hand, if your opponent asserts “Some British empiricists
believed that the mind is a substance,” then he is asserting something
relatively weak, and the truth of the proposition, “Some British

=== p. 68 ===

empiricist did not believe that the mind is a substance” is not sufficient
to refute him. Rather, you would have to prove the very strong
proposition, “No British empiricists believed that the mind is a
substance.” I would advise against trying to prove this. In general, the
stronger a thesis, the weaker a proposition needs to be to refute it; and
the weaker a thesis, the stronger a proposition needs to be to refute it.
Abstractly considered, strong propositions require a lot of evidence,
weak propositions require little. In practice, how much evidence is
required depends upon the needs of your audience. You must supply
as much evidence as your audience needs to be informed and
persuaded. Consider this argument for what is a rather strong
proposition, namely, that no taxation is justified:
  Nonvoluntary transfers of property are violations of rights. A thief
  who steals property violates the owner’s rights. Taxation is a
  nonvoluntary transfer of property from the individual to the
  government. Therefore, the government through taxation is no
  better than a thief.
Although it is possible that this argument is sound, it would not be
cogent for most audiences. For it does not take into consideration any
of the relatively obvious arguments against the premise that “taxation
is a nonvoluntary transfer of property” (in books on critical reasoning
and informal logic, this neglect to mention all the considerations
relevant to an issue is called the fallacy of suppressed evidence).
Consider an essay fragment that is written as a reply to the above
passage:

 Taxation is not like thievery at all, but rather like a payment for
 services rendered. People rely upon the government for various
 services that are essential to the quality of their life, not just police
 and fire protection, but roads, traffic laws, utilities, civil and
 criminal courts, and so on. People in business rely on the
 government even more, e.g. for patent laws and import and export
 laws. Indeed, when a businessman uses currency as his mode of
 exchange, he is using something made by the government, and he
 thereby uses all the machinery of government, its full faith and

=== p. 69 ===

 credit, to guarantee that the paper has the value he supposes it has.
 Further, taxes are legislated by elected representatives of the
 citizens, at least in some countries. Since representatives have the
 right to act for their clients, they can vote for taxes which fall on
 the clients themselves. Representatives are authorized by their
 clients to commit them to certain courses of action. In short,
 taxation is a voluntary transfer of property from citizen to
 government for services rendered.

This essay fragment has a better claim to expressing a cogent
argument than the first. This of course does not settle the issue of
which view about taxation is correct. The opponent of taxation might
have decisive replies to the objections raised by the proponent of
taxation. The point to be made here is that a person’s essay will not be
cogent unless she does raise and then answer exactly these sorts of
objections. Moreover, the position of the tax opponent will actually be
strengthened by this process, because it will force him to articulate
further grounds for his view that cannot be shaken by the objections
already raised.
These same remarks apply to the proponent of taxation. He should
explain why there is opposition to taxation, reply to that opposition,
explain how an opponent of taxation might respond, and then again
reply. Each set of objections and replies ought to be deeper, subtler,
and more revealing than the last, if the process works correctly. That is
how progress in philosophy often occurs. For more about this method
of reasoning, see chapter 5, section 8, “Dialectical Reasoning.”

 Consider the relative strengths of the propositions within each of
 the following sets. Which, if any, proposition is the strongest true
 proposition of the set? (Of course, there will be disagreement about
 the answers.)
  1.
       a. All empirical statements are based upon observation and

=== p. 70 ===

          nothing else.
       b. All empirical statements are based upon some actual
          observation.
       c. All empirical statements are based upon some possible
          observation.
  2.
       a. Lying is always wrong.
       b. Lying is usually wrong.
       c. Lying is sometimes wrong.
       d. Lying is never wrong.
  3.
       a. Killing is wrong.
       b. Killing is wrong except to protect one’s own life.
       c. Killing is wrong except to protect someone’s life from an
          attacker.
       d. Killing is wrong except to protect someone’s life from an
          unfair attack.

Notes
1 Propositions, statements, and assertions can be true or false, but
  facts cannot be true or false. Facts are factual; and a proposition
  that states a fact is true; a proposition that does not state a fact, that
  is, does not fit the facts, is false. Propositions that allegedly state
  facts or state alleged facts, but are false are sometimes called “states
  of affairs” by philosophers. There are two kinds of states of affairs,
  those that are “realized” – these are the ones that are facts – and
  those that are not realized – these are the things that make false
  propositions to be false.
2 The names of the four types of propositions come from the Latin

=== p. 71 ===

words “affirmo” (“I assert”) and “nego” (“I deny”). These words help
students who know Latin remember the appropriate place for the
sentence forms that go in the square.

