=== chunk: martinich-2015-philosophical-writing/ch3-essay-structure ===
title: The Structure of a Philosophical Essay
source_pdf: docs/sources/martinich-2015-philosophical-writing/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 72-91
page_scheme: pdf
plan_page_start: 72
plan_page_end: 91
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 72 ===

1 An Outline of the Structure of a Philosophical
Essay
Socrates was no friend of rhetoric, as he understood it. Still, he was
willing to concede this much: “Any discourse ought to be constructed
like a living creature, with its own body, as it were; it must not lack
either head or feet; it must have a middle and extremities so composed
as to suit each other and the whole work” (Phaedrus 264C). To extend
the metaphor, just as body parts have different shapes and functions –
arms, legs, wings, and horns – essay parts have different forms and
functions. Further, just as different animals have different anatomies,
philosophical essays have different anatomies. Some are more
complex and unusual than others; yet all evolve from a basic form.
In this book, the most basic form and its immediate evolutionary
descendants will be discussed. These forms all have a head, trunk, and
tail. In prosaic terms, every essay should have three parts: a beginning,
a middle, and an end. It was Winston Churchill, I believe, who put it
this way: say what you are going to do; do it; say what you have done.
You may have heard this before, for a good reason: it is true. Further,
as a first shot at specifying the structure of an essay, it is a valuable
remark. Yet, this truism would be objectionable if more were not said
about what goes into the structure of an essay and how a writer might
construct one. What is needed is a more informative guide (given
below) to writing.
In the more informative guide, the first element, “Say what you are
going to do,” and the third, “Say what you have done,” are
substantially unchanged. They appear below as segments I and V. The
second element, “Do it,” however, divides into three segments: II–IV.

=== p. 73 ===

                            A Simple One
     I     State the proposition to be proved.
     II    Give the argument for that proposition.
     V     State the upshot of what has been proven.

Segment I, stating the proposition to be proved, is the beginning of the
essay. The statement to be proved is often called “the thesis sentence,”
or, more simply, the thesis. The thesis might be a statement like
“Justice is rendering each person what is due to him,” or it might be a
historical thesis like “Descartes’s method of doubt is the same as
Sextus’s skepticism.”
Aristotle said, “A speech has two parts: you must state your thesis; and
you must prove it.” Although an essay is not exactly a written speech,
what Aristotle says about a speech can be applied to an essay. The
most basic division of an essay is into a statement of the thesis and its
proof. The statement of the thesis comes before the proof. If you begin
your essay with your first premise, rather than with a statement of
your thesis, the reader will have great difficulty in understanding the
relevance of the premise. One reason for this is that from any
proposition, an infinite number of propositions follows. (It is easy, but
not relevant here, to prove this. Anyone who has taken a course in
logic should be able to do it. Those without a course in logic might ask
their professor, some rainy day, to do it.) Although virtually all of the
infinite possible propositions will have an absurdly low probability of
being drawn by the author, often there will still be a relatively large
number of propositions that have a relatively high probability of being
drawn; and it is unfair and irrational for an author to expect the reader
to anticipate which of these she might draw.
Compare writing an essay with riding in an automobile. If a passenger
does not know the destination, it will be difficult for him to remember
the roads he has taken. If, on the other hand, the destination is known,

=== p. 74 ===

then every left and right turn, every sign and traffic signal, is organized
in relation to that destination. Since philosophy can be difficult, it is
important to make as clear as possible what you are trying to prove in
your essay. There should be no surprises in philosophy, except those
caused by an insight, expressed with brilliant clarity. Do not confuse
rhetorical pyrotechnics for philosophical light.
Of course, your principal purpose in writing a philosophical essay is
Truth for Truth’s sake (Veritas gratia Veritatis). Another purpose,
however, may be to show your professor that you know the material.
Before reading your essay, your professor will assume neither that you
do nor that you do not know the material; but once he does begin
reading it the burden of proof is on you to show that you do know the
material. An unclear essay is evidence of unclear thought.
Segments II–IV constitute the middle of the essay. Concerning
segment II, it is good practice to get out all of your premises as soon as
possible. This gives the reader the opportunity to see the general
structure of your argument. The reader has a chance to see the overall
picture of how you are going to get to your thesis. Then, in segment
III, show your argument to be valid, i.e. that the premises you have set
out will in fact get you to your conclusion. Explain how your premises
entail your conclusion. Since a valid argument guarantees a true
conclusion only if all the premises are true, the next step in your essay
(segment IV) is to prove that your premises are true. First, state your
evidence for your premises. This is the most direct and
straightforward way of pressing your case. Typically, your audience
will be more or less dubious about one or more of your premises.
Raising the objections that you anticipate your reader might have will
help clear the air of that doubt if you can answer those objections.
More, answering the objections will solidify your case and make it
more compelling for your reader.
Segment V is the end of your essay. There are several ways to end an
essay. One way is to summarize your argument. This is in line with the
notion “say what you have done.” Because it comes at the end of your
careful explication, your summary can assume a lot. You may use
technical terms freely and assume that the meanings of your
propositions are clear. Another way to end an essay is to explain what

=== p. 75 ===

further implication it has; or you might say what the next step in your
research is. This last conclusion is ill-advised if you are submitting
your final essay for a course.
Still another way to end an essay is to explain why your results are
important, if their importance could not be appreciated by stating
them earlier in the essay. Typically, you should explain why your
results are important near the beginning of your essay in order to
pique your reader’s interest. Sometimes, however, the importance
cannot be appreciated before one goes through the argument, or the
relation between the results and the importance is implausible without
the argument. In these cases it is both justified and advisable to
explain the importance of your results at the end.
I have briefly described the simplest structure a philosophical essay
can have. Typically, the structure of a philosophical essay will be much
more complicated. To help reflect this additional complication, let’s
look at a more complicated outline of the structure of a philosophical

                   A Slightly More Complex One
     I Beginning: state the proposition to be proved.
        B. State what is to be proved; state the thesis.
        C. Motivation: Explain why this thesis or topic is interesting
           or important.
        D. State what you will assume in your essay without

=== p. 76 ===

      argument.
  A. Explain the general force of the argument.
  B. Explain what the premises mean.
  A. Explain those terms that are used in a technical sense, or
     which are ambiguous; resolve the ambiguity.
  B. Explain how the conclusion follows from the premises.
      1. The inference to intermediate conclusions will have to
         be explained as part of the complete explanation.
      2. Sometimes one can explain the inferences by citing
         rules from a natural deduction system, e.g. modus
         ponens or modus tollens. More often the explanation
         concerns explaining the conceptual relations between
         the concepts expressed in the premises.
  C. Give the rules that justify the inferences that are not
     apparent from the initial statement of the argument.
  A. Give the evidence for the premises.
      1. Explain the premises; and explain the meaning of
         those terms that might be misunderstood and which
         bear upon the truth of your premises.
      2. Adduce the intuitions of the audience; supply
         examples and subsidiary arguments that lend support
         to the truth of your premises.
  B. Raise objections.
      1. Raise objections that have actually been raised
         against your position.
         a. Raise the objections that historically significant

=== p. 77 ===

                   philosophers have already raised to that problem.
               b. Raise the objections that your professor or fellow
                  students have raised.
            2. Raise objections that no one else has raised and
               which, when answered, further explicate and shore up
               your thesis.
        C. Answer the objections.
     V Conclusion:
        A. State the upshot of what you have proven.
        B. Indicate further results that one might try to get.

The outline is in large part self-explanatory. Still, other things need to
be said about it, since it is an abstract and schematic entity. First, not
every essay will contain every element of the outline. Second, not every
essay will contain these elements in the order in which they are given
here. The order given is a standard order, but it should not be
considered invariable. Your material should dictate the order. Third,
some items in the outline are roughly the same, e.g. I.A.2. and I.B.1.
One reason for this is that essays typically unfold one step at a time. It
is often rhetorically more effective to follow this procedure: provide
some general background, then state your own position, then provide
more detailed background, and so on. Another reason why the same
general topic is listed in more than one place in the outline is, again,
that your material should dictate your order, and sometimes that
means discussing a topic in one place and sometimes in another.
Finally, parts of this outline – even the whole of it – can be embedded
as subordinate elements within other parts of the outline. For
example, at the beginning of an essay, in the course of explaining what
previous philosophers have thought about this problem, you might
want to introduce the argument that some other philosopher gives for
his position. In other words, you would want to introduce segments
II–IV of the “Outline” as an element subordinate to I.A.2. If you were
to do this, then the outline for the early part of your essay would
contain embedded elements. (See the accompanying box on p. 56.)

=== p. 78 ===

Of course, this kind of embedding can occur at almost any other place
in your essay, and it can occur an indefinite number of times, even
with one embedding within another. For example, for segment IV
“Show that the premises are true,” the truth of some premise may
depend upon some argument that contains a premise that itself
depends upon some argument that needs to be explained, so one will
need to revert to segments II–IV as many times as is necessary to
explicate each premise. Although it may seem complicated to have
several embeddings, in fact, it is not. The human brain is quite capable
of multiple embeddings of diverse types. If you signal each successive
embedding for your readers, they will not be confused by the apparent
complexity. The “basic” outline suggests that a philosophical essay
contains only one argument. This is not correct, as we just saw in
discussing the need for embedded arguments in supporting one’s
premises. Furthermore, though an essay might have one main
argument, most essays contain other subordinate arguments which
will relate to the thesis in various ways. The author will subscribe to
some of these arguments; but in many cases she will merely be
reporting arguments of those opposed to her view or “flawed”
arguments made by those who will have supported her main thesis. In
writing your own essay, you should attempt to show your opponents’
views to be faulty while overcoming the problems of previous
arguments in support of your thesis.

     I Beginning: State the proposition to be proved.

=== p. 79 ===

        B. State what is to be proved; state your thesis.
        C. Motivation: Explain why this thesis is interesting or
           important.
     V Conclusion.

2 Anatomy of an Essay
Printed below is a sample essay, “Hobbes’s Divine Command Theory
of Morality,” which illustrates most items in the structure of a
philosophical essay discussed in the previous section. Passages within
the text have been numbered [1]–[22] as references to the
commentary provided below the text of the essay. For best results in
using the commentary, skim the entire essay first (it is quite brief).
Then return to the beginning of the essay; read each numbered item
and the accompanying footnote.

   [1] Hobbes’s Divine Command Theory of Morality

=== p. 80 ===

[2] The central problem in Thomas Hobbes’s moral philosophy is
answering the question, “Why are humans obligated to follow the
moral laws?”
[3] There are two basic ways of interpreting Hobbes’s answer to
this question. [4] One interpretation is that humans must obey
moral laws because God commands them to obey. [5] This is
generally known as the Taylor–Warrender Thesis. [6] The other
interpretation is that humans must obey moral laws because these
laws are rational, in the sense that they are deducible by reason. [7]
This might be called the Secular Thesis.
[8] In this essay, I present an interpretation that is a version of the
Taylor–Warrender Thesis.
[9] Its claim is that, according to Hobbes, an action is moral when
God commands it. [10] But my interpretation also incorporates the
main feature of the Secular Thesis, since what God commands is
[11] Hobbes often asserts that moral laws, which he identifies with
dictates of reason, are divine laws (Leviathan, ed. C. B.
Macpherson, Penguin Books, 1962, c. 31, p. 399). He also says “The
Word of God, is then also to be taken for the Dictates of reason,
and equity” (Leviathan, p. 456; see also De Cive 4.1). From the
many passages that could be cited, it is clear that Hobbes’s
adherence to this doctrine is genuine; it was not asserted only once
or half-heartedly
[12] The view that the moral laws must be obeyed because they are
commanded by God can also be proven by an argument that
Hobbes has to accept. Moral laws are laws. All laws require a
lawgiver. There is no lawgiver for moral law other than God.
Therefore, God is the lawgiver of moral law.
[13] One objection to my thesis is that Hobbes makes no appeal to
God when he deduces the moral laws. [14] My reply to this
objection is that it is not necessary for Hobbes to mention God in
the deduction of the moral laws. [15] The first step in
understanding why this is so is to draw a distinction between the

=== p. 81 ===

 form and the content of a law. [16] For Hobbes, as for any
 command theorist, a law has two parts: there is its content, which
 expresses what is to be done, and there is its form, which expresses
 the authority that obliges that it be done. [17] For example, the
 sentence, “I command that anyone who borrows something returns
 that thing in the same condition that it was lent,” is properly used
 to express a law, when it is uttered by a sovereign. [18] It is
 divisible into two parts. [19] The phrase, “I command,” expresses
 the form of the law; or, as Hobbes says, “The stile of a Law is, We
 command” (Leviathan, p. 588; see also p. 317). [20] The rest of the
 sentence expresses its content.
 [21] Although the form of moral laws is immediately clear (“I, God,
 command”), the content is not. For humans have no direct access
 to God, since He is invisible and otherwise unable to be sensed.
 Nonetheless, humans do know some things about God, such as
 that He is rational. Further, laws must be rational. An irrational or
 contradictory law is an impossibility. Now, since whatever is
 rational is deducible by reason, the content of the moral law is
 [22] The upshot of this discussion is that the content of the moral
 law is deducible by reason but not from our knowledge of the
 nature of God; and God’s command is what makes this content a
 law and hence obligatory.

3 Another Essay
There is no need to follow the outline structure that I have given.
Here’s a well-structured essay that does not tightly fit “The Structure
of a Philosophical Essay.” Comments are in footnotes, in order to
avoid having them confused with the numbered propositions in the

        The Great Fear and Ignorance Argument1
 The single most impressive argument in the philosophy of Thomas

=== p. 82 ===

Hobbes is what I shall call “The Great Fear and Ignorance
Argument.”2 It is a crucial part of his argument that human beings
need an absolute sovereign to govern them.3
  (1) Some people in the state of nature are dangerous.
  (2) It is very difficult to know who these people are.
  Therefore, (3) It is necessary to be afraid of everyone.4
The argument occurs in De Cive, the second of Hobbes’s three
books on political philosophy.5 The argument is impressive
because it is very brief and yet cogent. It begins with an
indisputable6 premise. The state of nature is the condition human
beings are in when there are no laws.
In addition to its importance for proving the necessity of
government,7 another reason for holding that the argument is
powerful is that it is easily adapted to explain the reasoning of
other social phenomena. Every schoolchild is instructed in the
program “Stranger Danger.” Here is its underlying argument:
  (SD-1) Some strangers are dangerous.
  (SD-2) You, child, cannot be sure which strangers are
  Therefore, (SD-3) You must be afraid of all strangers.

Notice its similarity to the Great Fear and Ignorance Argument.8
The Stranger Danger Argument may be even more forceful than
the original argument because children are more vulnerable in our
society than adults are.
But the general argument form has many more applications. Here
are two that may be called “The Policeman’s Argument” and “The
Feminists’ Argument.”9
  (PA-1) Some motorists who are stopped for a traffic violation
  are dangerous.
  (PA-2) A policeman cannot be sure which motorists are

=== p. 83 ===

  Therefore, (PA-3) A policeman must be afraid of all motorists.
  (WA-1) Some males are rapists.
  (WA-2) A woman cannot be sure which males are rapists.
  Therefore, (WA-3) A woman must be afraid of all males.
Other forms are easily constructed using the fears that African
Americans have about White Racists.10
Let’s now introduce an additional aspect of Hobbes’s Great Fear
and Ignorance Argument.11 Each person I in the state of nature is
intelligent enough to construct the argument for himself and will
know that every other person is constructing the same argument
with respect to I. That is, every person thinks that I is dangerous.
So each person has a good reason to launch a preemptive strike
against I. Knowing this, I also has a good reason to launch a
preemptive strike against everyone else. But this is the same as
being in a state of war with everyone else, for, as Hobbes said, war
does not require actual fighting, but any tendency to fight. That is
why the relations between the United States and the Soviet Union
during the second half of the twentieth century were called a Cold
War. It was a war with little actual fighting.
The Policeman’s Argument invites introducing another aspect of
Hobbes’s original argument.12 What attitude will a motorist take
when she realizes that the policeman is suspicious of her behavior?
It will be negative and probably something that includes anger and
resentment. This will make relations between the policeman and
motorists worse.
The point of Hobbes’s argument is to get people to see that
unrestricted freedom is not a good thing and that government is
necessary for a decent life. Government reduces the number of
dangerous people and the occasions when they can act. But the
power of government is always limited; and even within civil
societies, children, women, some minorities, and even policemen
have reason to be afraid.13

=== p. 84 ===

1 Titles are important. They should always be informative, and
sometimes they can be catchy too, as this one is supposed to be. How
could fear and ignorance be the topic of an interesting argument in
philosophy? Perhaps the word “ignorance” indicates that the essay has
something to do with skepticism. Is the argument about great fear or is
it a great argument? The essay itself will show that the author intends
both. At this point the title is simply provocative.
Trying to be provocative is dangerous; it might offend or reveal
callowness. A less catchy title might have done just as well, say,
“Thomas Hobbes’s Argument about Fear in the State of Nature.”
2 This first sentence orients the reader by giving him background
information. The essay will be about an important argument in the
philosophy of Thomas Hobbes.
3 This second sentence continues to orient the reader by giving
information about the immediate context of Hobbes’s argument.
4 The author is not wasting any time in presenting the argument. She
is confident that this brief argument is intriguing and will incline the
reader to continue reading. It also gives the reader the opportunity to
stop reading if he thinks that there is no hope of this argument being
interesting.
5 A student author provides this kind of information in order to show
her professor that she has some wider knowledge of Hobbes’s
philosophy than just the argument of De Cive and also to provide
context.
6 The author was tempted to write “incontrovertible.” That would
have been a very good word to use in the seventeenth century, but since
“indisputable” is more familiar and does the same work, it is better.
Don’t use unfamiliar words unnecessarily.
7 This opening phrase connects this paragraph with the earlier
statement of the importance of Hobbes’s argument. So the phrase
contributes to the coherence of the essay.
8 This sentence contributes to both the logical and rhetorical
coherence of the essay.
9 The form of Hobbes’s argument is given wider application. Notice
that the essay unfolds in stages: Hobbes’s argument, an argument of
the same form about strangers, two arguments of the same form about
policemen and feminists. Contrast this with giving all four arguments

=== p. 85 ===

     at once or Hobbes’s argument followed by the three others. Readers
     need to be given time to process the information being presented.
     10 It’s unnecessary to spell out the premises and conclusion for these
     arguments since the form of the previous arguments makes it clear how
     it should be done.
     11 Another aspect of the original argument, or something related to it,
     is now being presented. Uncover your argument step by step.
     12 The essay concludes with a provocative question and a comment
     about the practical implication of two of the arguments discussed. A
     further generalization of that implication is straightforward.
     13 The concluding paragraph repeats the main point of Hobbes’s
     argument and describes the importance of the related arguments.

Notes
[1] The title is an extremely important part of an essay because, if it is
   aptly formulated, it helps to satisfy the two most important parts of
   the beginning of an essay. Since the title is always the first thing a
   reader sees, even before the author’s name, it creates the first
   impression. The title should convey a narrow range of topics from
   which the actual topic is selected. This delimitation of the range
   orients the reader. The title, “Hobbes’s Divine Command Theory of
   Morality,” obviously indicates that the main topic of discussion will
   not include elephants or geological ages. It restricts the topic to the
   intersection of topics about Hobbes and the Divine Command
   Theory of Morality. Of course, understanding the title also relies
   upon a great deal of background information. The title is more
   informative to someone who knows who Hobbes is and what the
   divine command theory of morality is.
[2] The first sentence must effect a transition from the abstractness
   and sketchiness of the title to the concreteness and specificity of the
   essay itself. The transition is very smooth in this essay since the
   phrase, “Hobbes’s moral philosophy,” in the first sentence echoes
   two of the key words in the title. Item [2] satisfies I.A.1: Specify
   what general topic will be discussed. (The difference between I.A.1

=== p. 86 ===

  and I.B.1. and I.B.2 is solely in the relation the sentences have to
  other parts of the essay. I.A.1 is a report of the history of the
  problem without relating that history to the author’s own thesis;
  I.B.1. and I.B.2 report that history in relation to the author’s own
  thesis.)
[3] This sentence introduces I.2: report what previous philosophers
   have thought about this topic. Item [3] is also proleptic; that is, it
   sets forth in a general way something that needs to be related in
   detail. Proleptic sentences are like implicit promises to say more
   about the topic. Such promises need to be kept as soon as possible.
   In this case, the promise is kept in the sentences immediately
   following: [4]–[7].
[4] This sentence is the first part of specifying the claim made in [3].
[5] This sentence names the interpretation referred to in [4]. It would
   be appropriate to introduce a note here that would give references
   to the scholarly work of Taylor, Warrender, and any other scholar
   the author thinks provides relevant background to the issue. Such a
   note is not provided here for simplicity’s sake.
  Item [5] also marks the place where a discussion of the work of
  Taylor and Warrender could be inserted, if the author wanted to
  expand the essay. For example, sentence [5] could easily be
  expanded into three:
     [5] This is generally known as the Taylor–Warrender Thesis. [5a]
     A. E. Taylor first presented the thesis in these words: “I can only
     make Hobbes’s statements consistent with one another by
     supposing that he meant quite seriously what he so often says,
     that the ‘natural law’ is the command of God, and so to be
     obeyed because it is God’s command” (A. E. Taylor, “The Ethical
     Doctrine of Hobbes,” in Hobbes Studies, ed. Stuart Brown,
     Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1965, p. 49). [5b] Howard Warrender
     later elaborated a variation of it in this way: “[According to
     Hobbes] the reason why I ought to do my duty is that God
     commands it” (H. Warrender, The Political Philosophy of
     Hobbes, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1957, p. 213).

=== p. 87 ===

   These three sentences ([5]–[5b]) could be further expanded into a
   dozen or more if needed or desired, preferably by describing their
   views rather than by quoting them.
   Quoting or otherwise indicating what scholars have thought about
   some philosophical view provides background for the ideal reader
   and evidence for your professor that you have done research on and
   are well-informed about your topic. There are many other places in
   this essay that could be expanded in various ways. For example, see
   the note to [11].
[6] This and the next sentence complete the discussion of I.A.2. Notice
   the parallel structure of [4], which begins “One interpretation” and
   [6], which begins “The other interpretation.” This kind of structure
   ties together different sentences and contributes to what is called
   “coherence” or “cohesion” in an essay.
[7] This sentence is co-ordinate with [5]. It completes the discussion of
   I.A.2: “Report what previous philosophers have thought about this
   topic.”
[8] This sentence satisfies I.B: “State what is to be proved; state the
   thesis.”
[9] This sentence partially satisfies I.B. It further explains the thesis. It
   slightly repeats the information given in [6], but the repetition is
   worthwhile if the author thinks that the audience might not be very
   familiar with Hobbesian scholarship. The repetition saves the
   reader from looking back to see what the Taylor–Warrender Thesis
   is.
[10] This sentence continues to satisfy I.B. Like [9], it slightly repeats
   earlier information.
[11] The sentences of this segment satisfy both II: “Give the argument
   for the proposition to be proved;” and IV: “Show that the premises
   are true,” especially IV.A: “Give the evidence for the premises.” The
   argument is so brief and simple that its premises are not even
   stated in the essay. One consequence is that there is no need to
   include in the essay anything that would satisfy item III: “Show that

=== p. 88 ===

the argument is valid.”
  If the argument were spelled out, it would look like this:
  If Hobbes says that laws of nature are divine laws, then
    Hobbes believes that laws of nature are divine laws.
  Hobbes says that laws of nature are divine laws.
  _________________________________________
  Hobbes believes that laws of nature are divine laws.
(Some philosophers would claim that [11] does not express an
argument but only a proposition and the evidence for its truth. I do
not wish to argue the point here, and ask that it be accepted as an
argument for the sake of exposition.)
There is a good reason to spell out this simple argument here,
though not in the essay itself. Some scholars think the argument is
unsound; depending upon how “say” is defined, it is either the first
or second premise that is false. For example, Leo Strauss thinks
that for political reasons Hobbes, like many other philosophers,
wrote words that he did not intend to be taken literally. In an essay
as short as this one (two pages), there is no room to discuss
Strauss’s interpretation or even to mention it.
If the essay were expanded into a 10- or 20-page version, then it
would be appropriate to introduce Strauss’s views at this point. (For
further discussion of this issue, see chapter 4, section 5, “Successive
Elaboration.”)
Let’s now consider how [11] satisfies item IV. In the first sentence of
[11], the author gives a reference to Leviathan, which purportedly
substantiates her position. In the next sentence, the author actually
quotes Hobbes’s own words as evidence for her view and also
provides a further reference to Hobbes’s work. The last sentence of
the paragraph claims that other evidence could be provided
although it does not provide any of it. The author has presented a
fair amount of evidence for the truth of the premise, “Hobbes says
that the laws of nature are divine laws.” However, in a longer essay,
more evidence and some discussion of the evidence would have to
be provided.

=== p. 89 ===

[12] This paragraph develops a second argument for the author’s
   thesis. Although in theory one sound argument for a proposition is
   sufficient to prove it, in practice it is often necessary to develop
   more than one sound argument in an essay in order for the author
   to succeed in her purpose. There are at least two reasons for this.
   First, an audience will often not recognize an argument as sound if
   it is the only sound argument presented for the conclusion. It seems
   to be a psychological fact about humans that it is easier for them to
   see some argument as sound if there are several other arguments,
   even logically independent of the first, that have the same
   conclusion. Second, an author’s audience is diverse. Different
   people will recognize different arguments as sound. One person
   may be persuaded by one sound argument while another person by
   another, depending upon each person’s previously held beliefs and
   principles of evidence. Thus, in order to persuade a lot of people, it
   is typically necessary to develop several arguments for the same
   conclusion. To say this, however, is not to encourage an author to
   present her arguments too briefly or with insufficient detail. It is
   also not to encourage the author to present as many arguments as
   she can, no matter how bad or seemingly bad. Presenting a bad
   argument, or even one that appears to be bad, might be detrimental
   to the author’s goal. Even though an unsound argument for a
   proposition does not indicate that that proposition is false, it may
   have the psychological effect of causing the audience to think that
   the proposition is false. So far as the persuasiveness of an essay is
   concerned, presenting 20 bad arguments for a thesis might do more
   harm than simply presenting one sound argument. It should still be
   emphasized that a conclusion is true if there is even one sound
   argument for it; and the existence of a million bad arguments in
   support does not prove that the conclusion is false. If the
   argument of item [12] were made explicit, it would look like this:

[13] This sentence introduces item IV.B: Raise objections. It is the
   topic sentence of the paragraph. It invites the question, “Why

=== p. 90 ===

  doesn’t Hobbes mention God in his deduction of the moral law?”
  The question is answered in the immediately following sentences.
  The objection is a standard one raised by opponents of the Taylor–
  Warrender Thesis. Thus, this objection fits more specifically under
  section IV.B.1.a. In a longer essay, it would be appropriate to give a
  reference to at least the most important of these opponents, and
  even to describe their objection at some length. If this essay were a
  draft of a longer essay that the author was composing by the
  method of “Successive Elaboration,” then this would be an
  appropriate place for expanding the essay in the way just described.
  Because this essay is brief, even the references to the opponents of
  Taylor and Warrender have been omitted. It expresses in an
  unqualified way the general view of the author. This general view
  needs elaboration, which is presented in the following sentences.
[14] This sentence begins the answer to the objection expressed in
   [13]. It thus begins to satisfy item IV.C.
[15] This sentence continues item IV.C. Although it is not obvious –
   and it needn’t be – from this sentence that the distinction between
   form and content is a very important one, it will become obvious in
   due course. It is important for an author not to rush her exposition.
   She shouldn’t try to say everything that needs to be said in one or
   two sentences; she needs to uncover her thought step by step in
   neither a hurried nor a dawdling way.
  The most important point of an essay should not be introduced as a
  reply to an objection, for a reply is by its nature a subordinate part
  of the essay. Nonetheless, it is often legitimate to introduce
  somewhat important points as replies. If all the replies were
  relatively unimportant, then the essay would be rather boring to
  read.
[16] This sentence continues item IV.C. Further, although it begins by
   relating to Hobbes (“For Hobbes”), it immediately broadens its
   importance by generalizing it (“as for any command theorist”). The
   rest of the sentence then characterizes the difference between the
   form and content of a law. A characterization is always general and

=== p. 91 ===

   abstract.
   The next sentence makes the characterization clearer by illustrating
   it with an example.
[17] This sentence gives an example of what is characterized in [16]. It
   makes the characterization less abstract.
[18] This sentence begins an explanation of the example. It is proleptic
   and finds its realization in the following two sentences, items [19]
   and [20].
[19] This sentence explains which part of the example concerns the
   form of a law and relates it to Hobbes’s own words (“as Hobbes
   says”). There is a certain redundancy in the information given in
   [19], but it is justified, because the author’s point is not one that is
   likely to be familiar to the reader and having it explained in two
   different ways makes the reader’s burden lighter.
[20] This sentence is co-ordinate with [19]. But [20] is much briefer
   than [19]. More, it seems, needs to be said, and it is said in the next
   paragraph.
[21] The phrases, “the form of moral laws” and “the content” in the
   first sentence of this paragraph tie this paragraph to the
   immediately preceding one. Again, this creates cohesion. Most of
   this paragraph presents a reconstruction of how Hobbes relates the
   content of a moral law as rational (or deducible) to the form of a
   moral law.
   This completes the discussion of IV.C.
[22] This paragraph satisfies V: Conclusion. It summarizes the
   argument of the entire essay.

