=== chunk: martinich-2015-philosophical-writing/ch5-analytic-tactics ===
title: Tactics for Analytic Writing
source_pdf: docs/sources/martinich-2015-philosophical-writing/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 130-181
page_scheme: pdf
plan_page_start: 130
plan_page_end: 181
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 130 ===

Tactics for Analytic Writing
A number of different tactics are used in analytic writing, construed
broadly. Seven of the most important and widely used of these tactics
are discussed in this chapter: definitions, distinctions, analysis (in a
narrow sense), dilemmas, counterexamples, reductio ad absurdum
arguments, and dialectical reasoning. Since these topics are rather
technical, I want to introduce all of them together before discussing
each more completely in the seven sections of the chapter (but I will
briefly discuss them out of the order in which they are presented in the
sections below). Let me begin with dilemmas.
Dilemmas are useful for setting out problems. A dilemma makes
obvious some apparently contradictory aspects of widely held beliefs.
Since dilemmas need to be solved by some means, some methods of
problem solving need to be discussed.
Reductio ad absurdum is one of these methods. It is a way of proving
one’s own thesis indirectly by showing that the denial of that thesis is
absurd and hence false. Since the direct opposite of your thesis is
absurd and false, your own thesis must be true.
A counterexample is a way of showing that some proposed solution or
thesis is not a correct one; it shows that something is incorrect without
showing directly what particular solution or thesis is correct. The
method of counterexamples is a method of criticism, not theory
construction.
Dialectical reasoning is a way of thinking that can be adapted to a way
of structuring an essay. It begins with a simple and unqualified thesis,
subjects it to criticism, revises and reformulates it several times until a
complex, sophisticated and adequate thesis is arrived at. Dialectical
writing, which is an orderly record of dialectical reasoning, is a kind of
intellectual travelogue, in which all the important side-trips are
recorded as adventures necessary for reaching the traveler’s ultimate
destination.

=== p. 131 ===

Dialectical reasoning can also be used as a rhetorical tactic in doing
something called “analyzing a concept.” Conceptual analysis is the task
of breaking down a complex concept into simpler components, just as
chemical analysis is breaking down a complex chemical into simpler
ones.
All of the topics in this chapter concern ways of clarifying and making
essays more precise. A basic way of getting clear about things is to
divide them into different categories, that is, to distinguish them.
Making a distinction often requires defining one’s terms because the
terms often depend upon having a precise meaning.
Perhaps the most basic way of being clear and precise is to define a
word or phrase. The dismissive expression “That’s just a matter of
semantics,” if taken literally, is highly objectionable. Since semantics
concerns meaning, if two people have a semantic disagreement, then
they disagree about what they mean. And that is a significant matter.
(The expression “That’s just a matter of semantics” may have a point if
it is used to indicate that it is not important whether one word or
another is used to express a certain thought.)

1 Definitions
To define a word is to state the meaning of the word. Definition is
needed when there is good reason to believe that the reader does not
already know the meaning the author intends the word to have. This
can happen for various reasons. The author may be using a word that
has several meanings in one particular sense and it would not be
immediately clear to the reader which meaning that is. It would be
important for the author to specify which meaning the author intends.
In philosophy, a word often has a technical meaning or has various
technical meanings; so it is especially important to define it (a
technical definition). The words “knowledge,” “intuition,” “person,”
“property,” and “transcendent’,” to name a few, have various technical
meanings in philosophy. Also, the author may be using a word that has
an ordinary but somewhat vague meaning in a more precise sense.
This kind of definition is sometimes called a “precising” definition.
And, the author may be using a word in a new sense. This is called a

=== p. 132 ===

“stipulative” definition. If a word has an ordinary meaning, for
example, “mind” or “person,” but the author is going to use that word
in a technical sense, the reader will not know what the author means
unless the author tells him so. Sometimes a philosopher coins a new
word, for example, whoever coined the term “sense datum.” In such a
case, it is essential to give a definition; otherwise there is no way for
the reader to know what you mean.
Students often think that they do not need to define terms, even
technical terms, because they think that the professor must know what
the words mean, since the professor is an expert. That reason is beside
the point. The student author’s goal is to show the professor reader
that she knows what she is talking about, as explained in chapter 1. So,
in addition to the fact that authors in general need to define technical
and other terms needing explanation, student authors have a special
need to define them. The burden of proving that the student knows
what she is talking about is on the student.
A definition has two parts: the definiendum (the word to be defined)
and the definiens (the words that give the meaning of the
definiendum). A good definition is one in which the words in the
definiens are easier to understand than the words in the definiendum.
If they are not, the author is not helping the reader to understand the
definiendum. The definiens cannot contain the key word in the
definiendum. If the key word occurs in the definiens, then the
definition is circular. For example, this definition is circular:
     A human being is a being that is human.
I said “key” word because sometimes a definiendum contains several
words. Here’s a definition of “empirical argument”:
     An argument is empirical =df it contains at least one empirical
     premise
or
     Something is an empirical argument =df it contains at least one
     empirical premise.
The key word here is “argument.” The definition is supposed to be

=== p. 133 ===

what “empirical argument” means. It explains it in terms of an
empirical premise. If the process of definition ends here and the
reader does not know what counts as an empirical premise, the
definition is defective. But if the definition is accompanied by another,
  A premise is empirical =df the most direct way of establishing its
  truth is by sensation
then the definition is acceptable.
Here are some examples of how definitions can be introduced in
essays:
  The main point of W. V. Quine’s article “Two Dogmas of
  Empiricism” is that the distinction between analytic and synthetic
  propositions has no theoretical justification. Analytic propositions
  are defined as those that are true in virtue of the meaning of their
  words. Synthetic propositions are defined as those that are made
  true by empirical facts.
  I shall argue that God is omnipotent and omniscient. I define “x is
  omnipotent” as “x is able to do everything that can be done” and “x
  is omniscient” as “x knows everything that can be known.”
  According to Thomas Hobbes, God is neither just nor unjust. By
  justice he means not breaking any covenant; and by injustice he
  means breaking a covenant.
  According to Thomas Hobbes, God is neither just nor unjust. By “x
  is just,” he means “x has not broken any covenant;” and by “x is
  unjust,” he means “x has broken a covenant.”
Definitions have been categorized in various ways. Implicitly in the
discussion above, I divided definitions into descriptive (how a word is
usually used), precising (how a word with a vague meaning will be
used in a more precise way), stipulative (inventing a new meaning for
a word), and technical (giving a precise definition of a word for use in
the construction of a theory). (These categories are not mutually
exclusive.) Although it is not useful for our purposes to give a neat
categorization of kinds of definitions or even to discuss all the kinds
that there are, one kind of definition deserves special mention:

=== p. 134 ===

definition by genus and species.
This method is generally credited to Aristotle. A stock philosophical
example of a definition (or analysis) is of this type:
  A human being is a rational animal.
Definitions of the same type are:
  A beast is an animal without reason.
  An animal is a living being that can move itself from place to place.
  A plant is a living being that cannot move itself from place to place.
Certain facts about genera and species are best illustrated by what is
known as the Tree of Porphyry, attributed to Porphyry, a neoPlatonic
philosopher. Each capitalized word or phrase in the diagram below
designates either a genus or species.

The concepts of genus and species are correlative; one has to be
explained in terms of the other. A (direct) genus is the immediately
higher general kind of a species. A (direct) species is an immediately
lower kind of thing. Some genus will be the highest one (Being) and
not be a species to any other genus. Each genus has more than one

=== p. 135 ===

species falling under it. For example, Organism has the species
Animals and Plants. Each item that is immediately lower than another
item (for example, Animals is lower than Organism) is a species of the
higher item, the genus. Some species will be the lowest ones and will
not be a genus for any other species. Human beings is a species with
no subspecies in Aristotelian and scholastic philosophy. However, in
contemporary anthropology, Human Beings (homo in Latin) is a
genus because it does have various species below it, such as homo
erectus, homo sapiens, and homo sapiens sapiens.
What generates a species under a genus is something that some things
of the species have that other things in the genus do not have. This
thing, call it a “property,” distinguishes the members of one species
from those of another species of the same genus. This distinguishing
property is called “the specific difference” because it is the difference
that generates the species. Although not quite sensible, it may help to
remember the term by thinking that it is the difference that is specific
to the species. Definitions by genus and species consist of a statement
of the relevant genus and specific difference. The definition
   A human being is a rational animal
consists of the genus animal and the specific difference rational in the
definiens.
What form should a definition take? Philosophers often deal with
abstract objects or at least often talk about objects abstractly like truth,
beauty, and goodness. Traditionally, this has led them to try to define
truth, beauty, and goodness. But starting with an abstract noun often
resulted in definitions that were stilted or obscure, for example,
   To be just is for one person to give another person what the first
   person owes to the second.
Inspired by certain developments in formal logic, philosophers in the
20th century came to see that many nouns were abstracted from
predicate expressions and that the predicate expressions themselves
presented more perspicuous definienda. This led to the following
changes:

=== p. 136 ===

          Original form New form
          Justice       x is just
          Knowledge     x knows that p
          Truth         x is true
          Promise       x promises that p to an addressee y
          Excuse        x excuses y for an action a
Using the predicative form, the above definition of justice becomes the
smoother:
  x is just to y if and only if x gives to y what x owes y.
By this definition, we know what any sentence like “Adam is just to
Beth” or “Carol is just to David” means. One simply substitutes the
appropriate names in the places marked by “x” and “y.” Let’s consider
another example: the new formulation of the classical definition,
  knowledge is justified true belief
becomes
  x knows that p if and only if it is true that p and x is justified in
  believing that p.
And when this is made more explicit, it becomes:
  x knows that p if and only if
   2. x believes that p; and
   3. x’s belief that p is justified.
This last definition makes the components of knowledge stand out
more starkly than the first.
One last point. It often turns out that philosophers need to define pairs
of terms that they want to be contradictories, such as truth/falsity or
objectivity/subjectivity (see chapter 2, section 5). The appropriate way
to do this in order to guarantee that the defined terms are genuine
contradictories is to define one term and then to define the other as

=== p. 137 ===

simply everything that is not the first. Here are two examples:
  “x is war” means “x is a stretch of time during which one civil state
  is inclined to attack another civil state”
  “x is peace” iff “x is not war”
  “x is a bachelor” means “x is an unmarried, adult, male, human
  being”
  “x is a nonbachelor” means “x is not a bachelor.”1
It is not possible to define every word. If it were, then even the words
used in the definiens would need to be defined; and then the words to
define them would need to be defined, ad infinitum. If definition could
go on forever, then the “ad infinitum” phrase would not be a problem.
But definition cannot go on forever for at least two reasons. First,
people know the meanings of many words even though they have not
learned their meanings through definitions. Second, if some words in
the definiens always needed to be defined, then there would be no
foundation for meaning, no starting point. One may wonder, then,
what the foundation for meaning is. In a word, it is interaction
between interlocutors (people who alternate between speaking and
listening) in a context. The context of course is always some part of the
world, in addition to the interlocutors themselves. Since this issue gets
us into very deep water not essential to understanding how to write,
no more will be said about this matter.

2 Distinctions
Philosophy students during the Middle Ages allegedly were given the
following rule of thumb: When faced with a contradiction, make a
distinction. That rule encourages the abuse of distinction-making and
eventually led to the bad reputation of scholastic philosophers, so-called “logic-choppers,” “hairsplitters,” and “dunces” (after John Duns
Scotus). Distinctions should be made only when they are necessary
and justified.
Even when a distinction is justified, there are good and bad ways of
making it. A good distinction, called a proper distinction, has two

=== p. 138 ===

characteristics: its terms are exhaustive, and they are mutually
exclusive. A pair of terms is exhaustive when at least one of them
applies to each object of the group that is supposed to be
distinguished. A pair of terms are mutually exclusive when only one of
the terms applies to each object.
The way to ensure this kind of division of objects is to use
contradictory pairs of terms:
   red/nonred
   blue/nonblue
   human/nonhuman
   animal/ nonanimal
   just/nonjust
   merciful/nonmerciful
The great advantage of proper distinctions is that they give a neat
categorization of objects. There is a place for everything and
everything is in its place. This can be seen in the Tree of Porphyry in
section 1, above. One of the personae of Søren Kierkegaard reports a
classification of mankind into “officers, servant girls, and chimney
sweeps” (Repetition, ed. and tr. by Howard V. Hong and Edna H.
Hong, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1983, p. 162). These
terms are obviously not exhaustive, and are not mutually exclusive
either. An even more elaborately improper distinction is the one Jorge
Luis Borges supposedly reports in his essay “The Precise Language of
John Wilkins.” In an obscure Chinese encyclopedia, the following
distinctions are made between animals: “(a) those that belong to the
emperor, (b) embalmed ones, (c) those that are trained, (d) suckling
pigs, (e) mermaids, (f) fabulous ones, (g) stray dogs, (h) those that are
included in this classification, (i) those that tremble as if they were
mad, (j) innumerable ones, (k) those that are drawn with a very fine
camel’s hair brush, (l) others, (m) those that have just broken a flower
vase, (n) those that resemble flies from a distance” (Other
Inquisitions, 1937–1952, tr. Ruth Simms, New York: Washington
Square Books, 1965, p. 108). I leave it as an exercise for the reader to
explain why the terms are neither exhaustive nor mutually exclusive.

=== p. 139 ===

While it is easy to see that some distinctions are not proper, for
example, red/blue or dog/animal, others are not. Consider male/
female. Although it may look proper, it is not. Hermaphrodites have
characteristics of both males and females. They are neither one nor the
other. We tend to forget them because they are a small minority.
What would be a good way to divide people into sexes? The
distinctions male/nonmale and female/nonfemale are each proper
distinctions, but each seems a bit odd. Each appears to favor one sex
over the other (people have sex; pronouns have gender). One way of
avoiding the promotion of one of these sexes over the other is to
distinguish between normal and nonnormal sexes and then to divide
the normal ones into male and female. (Here nonnormal sex is a
biologically descriptive category and neither morally nor
psychologically normative.)
A famous example of a philosophical distinction that is improper but
has been mistaken for a proper one is sense-datum/material-object. A
shadow is neither a sense datum nor a material object. (See J. L.
Austin, Sense and Sensibilia, ed. G. J. Warnock, New York: Oxford
University Press, 1964, pp. 55–61. For another example, see John
Searle and His Critics, ed. Ernest Lepore and Robert Van Gulick,
Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 1991, p. 141.) Another is the distinction
appearance/reality. The appearances of shadows, mirror images, and
rainbows are their reality; also the appearances that constitute or are
part of consciousness are their reality. (More controversially, the
secret thoughts of Zeus are neither appearance nor reality.)
Let’s now consider the two ways of drawing a distinction: by
characterization and by example. We begin with the latter. A
distinction can be drawn by giving enough examples to get the reader
to understand what the distinction comes to. Here is an example of an
author explaining a distinction by giving examples:
  There are two kinds of labor: alienated and unalienated. The labor
  of a peasant, the labor of an auto worker, and the labor of a
  bureaucrat are alienated. The labor of an artisan, a poet and a
  statesman is unalienated.
The drawback of characterization by example is that it may not be

=== p. 140 ===

obvious what the principle of division is. Certainly this is the case in
Borges’s Chinese classification. It is easy for the disseminator of a
distinction to be misled herself. If she relies only upon examples, it is
possible that the author will conflate two different distinctions.
Characterization, then, is theoretically the better method of drawing a
distinction because it specifies the principle or property that
differentiates the terms. Here is an example of characterizing the
distinction between alienated and unalienated labor:
   There are two kinds of labor: alienated and unalienated. Labor is
   alienated when the laborer does not have full control over his work
   or does not receive its full benefit. Labor is unalienated when it is
   not alienated.
It is often advisable to combine both methods, as in this passage:
   There are two kinds of labor: alienated and unalienated. Labor is
   alienated when the laborer does not have full control over his work
   or does not receive its full benefit, for example, the labor of
   peasants, auto workers, and bureaucrats. Labor is unalienated
   when it is not alienated, such as that of the self-employed, poets
   and statesmen.
As my discussion of characterizing a distinction suggests, every
distinction depends upon the existence of some property that all the
terms of one group or category have and that all the things in the other
group lack, even if the author is not able to articulate that difference.
Without a difference, there would be no distinction at all. Sometimes
people try to draw a distinction and fail because they in fact fail to
specify a difference. This is what is meant by the somewhat inaccurate
phrase a distinction without a difference. (It is inaccurate because
without a difference there is no distinction at all, only the attempt or
appearance of a distinction.) For example, in Woody Allen’s film
Mighty Aphrodite, an ineffectual father tries to save face by
purporting to distinguish between the head of the family (himself) and
the decision maker (his wife). But in fact this is a distinction without a
difference. His wife is the head of the family just because she is the
decision maker. (At best, he would be a titular head; that is a person

=== p. 141 ===

with the title of “Head” but without the power of one.) A related
example concerns the English Church. When the Act of Supremacy
needed to be reformulated, some clerics were reluctant to call
Elizabeth I the “Head of the Church,” as Henry VIII had been called,
because she was a woman. They wanted to make a distinction. So the
term Governor was settled on. But the Act restored to her exactly the
powers held by Henry VIII and the Act described her as “supreme . . .
in all spiritual or ecclesiastical things.” So the alleged distinction
between Head and Governor is a distinction without a difference. Also,
there was a tradition in England of distinguishing between the king’s
two bodies: his physical body and his political body. The rebels of the
English Civil War claimed to be trying to liberate the political king
Charles I by fighting the person Charles Stuart. The royalists thought
this alleged distinction between the royal and natural bodies of their
king was a distinction without a difference.
Permit me one final example. A French defense minister once tried to
defend his country’s decision to resume nuclear testing by in effect
saying the following: “The French government is not testing nuclear
bombs. A distinction must be made between bombs and devices that
explode. The French government is testing nuclear devices that
explode, not bombs.” The minister was ridiculed, because he was
trying to draw a distinction without a difference. But the testing
continued.

3 Analysis
Analysis is analogous to definition. Definitions are explicitly about
giving the meanings of words. Analyses are explicitly about giving the
necessary and sufficient conditions for concepts. Since words express
concepts, definitions are the linguistic counterparts to analyses. Much
of what was said about definitions applies to analyses. Perhaps both
topics could have been treated together; but I think that pedagogically
it makes sense to treat them separately.
Every analysis, like every definition, consists of two parts, an
analysandum and an analysans. The analysandum is the notion that
needs to be explained and clarified, because there is something about

=== p. 142 ===

it that is not understood. The analysans is the part of the analysis that
explains and clarifies the analysandum, either by breaking it down
into parts or by specifying its relations to other notions.
An analysis tries to specify in its analysans necessary and sufficient
conditions for the concept expressed in the analysandum. Necessary
conditions are those that the analysans must contain in order to avoid
being too weak. Being an organism is a necessary condition for being a
human, because a human must be an organism. But being an
organism is not a sufficient condition. Dogs are organisms but not
humans. Sufficient conditions are those that are enough to guarantee
that the concept in the analysans is satisfied. Having ten million
dollars of Microsoft stock is a sufficient condition for being rich. But it
is not a necessary condition, because a person can be rich without
having that much Microsoft stock. Having ten thousand pounds of
gold is also a sufficient condition for being rich.
There is one further preliminary point to make. Let’s consider this
tentative analysis of bachelorhood:
   2. it is adult;
   3. it is male.
   This is a pretty good first shot. It is not, perhaps, adequate. One
   might think that since only humans are bachelors, a fourth
   condition needs to be added:
However, young adult seals that have not yet mated are also called
bachelors. For two reasons it is not necessary for us to argue here
about whether or not to add the fourth condition. First, my intention is
to give an example of an analysis, not to defend that analysis. Second,
what should be noticed here is that setting out an analysans as
explicitly as I have just done makes the terms of the disagreement
between the pro-seal-bachelors and the anti-seal-bachelors clear. And
when the terms of disagreement are clear, debate about what side is

=== p. 143 ===

correct is much easier.
Let’s now consider a genuinely philosophical analysis of a concept:
   A person S knows that p if and only if
   2. S believes that p;
   3. S is justified in believing that p.
This analysis is very attractive (compare it to the definition of “x
knows that p” in section 1). It makes at least one element of knowledge
very clear: it is not possible to know something that is false.
Sometimes people say that they know something when in fact what
they say they know is false. This does not show that it is possible to
know something that is not true. It simply shows that sometimes
people are mistaken about what they think they know. Our analysis of
knowledge also assimilates knowledge to belief. Knowledge is a kind of
belief according to the above analysis. This is more debatable. There
have been some powerful arguments with the conclusion that
knowledge and belief are different psychological states. Again, it is not
to our purpose to argue whether the above analysis or some other is
correct or not. Finally, condition (3) is surely not adequate as it stands.
In order to be a satisfactory analysis, it is necessary to specify what
being justified in believing something means. Again, it is not to our
purpose to argue about this matter. It is enough to point out that the
analysis makes the issues that need to be debated clear.
There are three ways in which proposed analyses commonly go wrong:
an analysis may be defective by (1) being circular, (2) being too strong,
or (3) being too weak. Three kinds of defects will be discussed in order.
An analysis is circular if the analysandum, or its key term, occurs in
the analysans. For example, if one is trying to analyze “freezing,” it is a
mistake to propose as the analysans “something that happens to a
liquid when it freezes.” The problem is obvious: If someone needs an
analysis of freezing because he does not know what it is, then it does
no good to tell him that it is something that happens to a liquid when
it freezes. This does not make the notion of freezing any clearer or

=== p. 144 ===

more understandable because, since the analysans includes the notion
of freezing, one must understand that, before one can understand the
analysandum: freezing. If, on the other hand, someone already
understands what freezing is, then he has no use for an analysis of
freezing in the first place. In either case, to the extent that the
understanding of an analysans depends upon understanding the
analysandum, the analysis is uninformative and unhelpful.
However, the above analysis is not totally uninformative. It does
convey that freezing is something that happens to liquids, and the
person in need of the analysis may not have known this before being
presented with the circular analysis. But notice that this
informativeness is due to the part of the analysans that did not depend
upon any prior understanding of the analysis of freezing.
It is important to distinguish this kind of circularity from a related
phenomenon that sometimes goes under the same name. Suppose that
we have a number of analyses to propose that have as their analysanda
A, B, C, . . ., Z. Further suppose that A occurs as part of the analysans
of B, B as part of the analysans of C, . . ., and Z as part of the analysans
of A.
Now it may at first seem that someone who did not understand any of
these notions would not be helped by any of these analyses. If she
doesn’t understand any of the analysanda, and each analysans
contains one of the analysanda, then it would seem that she cannot
understand any analysans either; she has no entry into the circle. In
extreme cases, this may be true. Usually, however, someone who
encounters such a group of analyses has a fairly good understanding of
at least one (and possibly more) of the notions involved. If so, she can
get at least a partial understanding of the other notions and also get a
better and clearer understanding of the one she started with by going
around the circle and seeing how it is connected with related notions.
Thus, if circularity is spread over a great many analyses (the more, the
better), it may cease to constitute a defect.
This idea of analysis presupposes, however, that the goal of
philosophical analysis is understanding. Not all philosophers take this
view; some regard the goal to be reduction. The idea behind

=== p. 145 ===

reductionism is that, like scientific theories, one philosophical theory
is preferable to another if it requires fewer different kinds of objects in
order to explain reality. Thus, if one theory requires one or two kinds
of objects, then it is superior to another that requires 27 kinds. This
explains the traditional philosophical preference for monism and
dualism. (The principle that entities should not be multiplied beyond
what is necessary is known as “Ockham’s razor,” after William of
Ockham, a fourteenth-century English philosopher who asserted it.)
Suppose that we have a notion of some kind of object, and that it is
possible to give an analysis in which the analysans contains no
mention of this kind of object. The analysandum is then theoretically
dispensable, since whatever we might want to say about it can be said
in terms of the analysans instead. For example: It might seem as
though numbers must be recognized as existing objects, because we
say such things as “Two plus two equals four” and “There is an integer
which is both even and prime,” which seem to be true only because of
certain facts about numbers. But if we can find a way of analyzing the
notion of a number, of addition, of being prime, and so on, entirely in
terms of the characteristics of physical objects, then we can do without
the assumption that numbers exist; for we can say that “two plus two
equals four” is really just a statement about physical objects in a
greatly abbreviated form. Similarly, a reductive materialist will try to
show that various kinds of things that do not seem to be made of
matter, in particular, minds, can in fact be analyzed in material terms.
In some cases the reduction takes more than one step, that is, it
depends on more than one analysis. Thomas Hobbes, for example,
proposed to reduce all phenomena to motions of material particles. He
tried to analyze governments in terms of the actions of human beings,
the actions of human beings in terms of the motions of their limbs and
organs, and these, finally, in terms of the motions of material particles.
It is clear, however, that a group of reductive analyses must never be
allowed to form a circle, however large. An analysandum that creeps
back into a subsequent analysans has not been reduced away or
eliminated from the philosophical theory, and the reductionist’s whole
project is vitiated. This fact has certain paradoxical consequences.
There are many cases in which it is obvious that A can be analyzed in

=== p. 146 ===

terms of B and B in terms of A, but neither of the two is simpler or
more basic than the other. The reductionist who takes Ockham’s razor
seriously will presumably want to adopt one of these reductions, but
she cannot adopt both of them without forming a circle. How is she to
choose?
Let me now turn to the other ways in which an analysis might be
defective, namely, how an analysis might be too strong or too weak. An
analysis is too strong just in case it is possible to give an example of
the notion being analyzed that does not satisfy all the conditions
specified in the analysans; conversely, an analysis is too weak just in
case it is possible to describe something that satisfies all the conditions
set down in the analysans, but is not an instance of the analysandum.
Consider, for example, this analysis of bachelorhood:
2. it is male; and
This analysis is too weak, because children satisfy all three conditions,
but we do not count them as bachelors; only adults are bachelors.
Let’s now consider a stronger analysis of bachelorhood:
3. it is human;
4. it is adult; and
This analysis is too strong; it is easy to find bachelors who do not play
tennis and therefore do not meet condition (5).
It is possible for a single analysis to be both too strong and too weak.
For example, we can combine the defects of the analysis of

=== p. 147 ===

bachelorhood that was too weak with the defects of the analysis that
was too strong:
3. it is human; and
Since there are bachelors who don’t play tennis, the analysis is too
strong. Since there are male, unmarried children who play tennis and
are not bachelors (because they are too young), the analysis is too
weak. In short, it is both too strong and too weak.
Here are two more examples of philosophical analyses that are too
strong and too weak. These analyses are supposed to explain how
private property comes to exist. It assumes the condition of “the state
of nature,” that is, no civil government exists. It also assumes as a
background condition that no object has previously been owned.
Here’s the first analysis:
  An object O becomes the property of a person P if and only if P
  mixes P’s labor with O.
This analysis is too strong because a person can own something
without mixing their labor with it. We will present a situation in which
the left-hand side of the analysis is true and the right-hand side of the
analysis is false. Suppose a tree contains an apple and a person
controls the apple by guarding it against all others. Then that person
owns the apple. But that person has not mixed her labor with the
apple. The person may have exerted herself by fending off would-be
takers of the apple, but she has not touched the apple and hence could
not have mixed her labor with it.
A defender of this analysis might object to this counterexample in
various ways. One is to deny that guarding an object is the same as
owning it. Another is to extend the concept of mixing one’s labor to
include guarding an object. Are there replies to these objections?

=== p. 148 ===

The next counterexample is supposed to show that the analysis is too
weak. We will present a situation in which the right-hand side of the
analysis is true and the left-hand side of the analysis is false. Suppose
that someone squashes an apple underfoot. The person has mixed her
labor with it but does not own it.
Let’s now consider the second analysis; this one is about how value in
an object originates. The concept of mixing one’s labor is used again:
  An object O has a value if and only if a person P mixes P’s labor
  with O.
The analysis is too strong. Suppose two hungry people see a ripe apple.
The apple has a value because they want it. But neither has mixed his
labor with it.
The analysis is also too weak. Suppose again that a person
intentionally squashes an apple. The person has mixed his labor with
the apple but the apple has no value because no one wants a squashed
apple.
It is orthodox to hold that the terms in the analysans are more basic or
primary than the terms in the analysandum. However, there are
correlative terms that are equally primary. (Two terms are correlative
terms just in case the simplest analysis for each term is in terms of the
other.) That is, it is incorrect to say that one is more basic or primary
than the other. Most alleged correlative terms are contestable. For
example, some philosophers have in effect defined the terms mind and
matter in this way:
                          Mind: no matter.
                          Matter: never mind.
It is easy to be a dualist if mind and matter are genuinely correlative
terms. The terms particular and universal have also sometimes,
though not always, been treated as correlative terms: a universal is
something that groups particulars into a class; and a particular is
something that is grouped into a class by a universal but does not itself
group things.
Some pairs of terms that initially look like correlative terms may turn

=== p. 149 ===

out not to be. For example, it is tempting to argue that husband/ wife
constitute correlative terms on the grounds that each is definable in
terms of the other:
  A husband is a person that has a wife.
  A wife is a person that has a husband.
However, while it is true that the concept of a husband is not more
basic or primary than the concept of a wife and vice versa, this does
not entail that they are correlative terms. Each is definable in terms of
something common to both of them:
  A husband is a male spouse.
  A wife is a female spouse.

  1. Is the following analysis too strong, too weak or adequate? If
     too strong or too weak, make the changes necessary to make it
     adequate.
        An object O increases in value at a time t1 iff people are
        willing to give more for it at t1 than at the immediately
        previous time.
  2. Is the following analysis of increase in value for a particular
     person too strong, too weak, defective in some other way, or
     adequate? If it is defective in any way, make the changes
     needed to make it adequate.
        An object O increases in value for a person P at a time t1 iff
        P ’s desire for O is greater at t1 than it was at the immediately
        preceding time.
  3. It has been argued that the following analysis of the origin of
     property is too strong and too weak. Is there any other criticism
     that could be made against it?

=== p. 150 ===

      An object O becomes the property of a person P if and only if
      P mixes P’s labor with O.
4. Is the following analysis too strong or too weak? If it is defective
   in either way, change it so that the analysis becomes adequate.
      An action A is merciful if and only if there is a person P1 and
      there is a person P2 such that in doing A, P1 gives P2
      something good that P1 does not owe to P2.
5. Is the following analysis too strong or too weak? If it is defective
   in either way, change it so that the analysis becomes adequate.
      A person P is perfectly merciful if and only if P does many
      merciful actions and no unmerciful actions.
6. Use your final analyses in (4) and (5) to give an analysis of
   these two analysanda:
      An action A is merciful if and only if
      A person P is perfectly merciful if and only if
7. In the following paragraph from Plato’s Gorgias, what is
   Socrates saying the problem is with Gorgias’ definition of
   rhetoric?
      Socrates: Gorgias, what is your definition of rhetoric?
      Gorgias: Speaking.
      Socrates: How do you mean that, Gorgias? Do you mean
      rhetoric explains to sick people how they can get well?
      Gorgias: No.
      Socrates: Then, rhetoric is not concerned with all speech.
      Gorgias: No. Of course not.
8. What is Locus saying is wrong with the analysis of a contract in
   this exchange?
      Hocus: A contract is a promise between two people.
      Locus: If Lee and Mee promise each other to meet at noon

=== p. 151 ===

        on the West Mall, have they made a contract?
  9. What is Mar saying is wrong with Hob’s analysis of social
     contract in the dialog below?
        Hob: To enter into a social contract it is sufficient if a person
        consents to a government.
        Mar: If a person consents to letting a neighbor borrow a
        lawnmower, is there a contract?
        Hob: No.

4 Dilemmas
Another important analytic strategy often used in writing
philosophical essays involves formulating a problem as a dilemma.
One reason for this is that one common philosophical project is to
investigate and straighten out widely held, but unreflective, beliefs.
Many of these beliefs, upon reflection, are either in tension with one
another or inconsistent. The same also holds for various beliefs that
have been developed after a long period of reflection. Often one view
seems to conflict with another view espoused by the same person; or a
text is not clear and one plausible interpretation conflicts with a
plausible interpretation of another part of the text. In all of these
cases, the tension or inconsistency between texts or beliefs can be
made explicit by formulating a dilemma.
In chapter 2, the valid inference forms of constructive and destructive
dilemma were explained. These may be called formal dilemmas
because they do not say anything about the content of the premises or
conclusions. In a more familiar sense of the word dilemma, a dilemma
always involves setting out alternatives that are somehow conceptually
unpleasant. For example, consider this argument, which contains a
material dilemma:
  If determinism is true, then humans are not responsible for their
  actions; and if indeterminism is true, then humans do not cause
  their own actions.

=== p. 152 ===

The alternatives expressed in the conclusion are unpleasant because
humans want to be responsible for at least some of their actions and
want to be the cause of their actions. (Note that formal-dilemma/
material-dilemma are not mutually exclusive terms.)
A dilemma can form the core of an essay. Often it requires no more
than an introductory sentence or two and a relaxation of the ascetic
style of formal logic. Consider this essay fragment that incorporates
the example of constructive dilemma above:
  dilemma.
Although this fragment needs to be worked out in much more detail –
definitions need to be supplied, explanations as to why causality
precludes responsibility, etc. – it is a start. Because material dilemmas
conclude with unpleasant alternatives, philosophers try to resolve
them. Since constructive and destructive dilemmas are formally valid,
the only way to resolve them is to show that one of the premises is
false. Since they have two premises, there are two standard ways of
doing this: showing that the conjunctive premise, composed of two
conditional propositions, is false; or showing that the disjunctive
premise is false.
Showing that the disjunctive premise is false is called going between
the horns of the dilemma. To show that the disjunctive premise is false
is to show that both disjuncts are false and that there is some third
possibility that is true. Consider this dilemma:

=== p. 153 ===

  If Hobbes is right, then humans are nothing but machines; and if
  Hume is right, humans have no substantial existence at all.

It is easy to see that this dilemma can be resolved by going between
the horns. The second premise presents a false alternative. The
philosophies of Hobbes and Hume are not the only choices. There are
dozens to choose from. Good dilemmas are not so easy to defeat. The
good ones are usually formulated with a disjunctive premise that
either does or at least seems to exhaust the alternatives as in the essay
fragment above. The premise “Either determinism is true or
indeterminism is true” seems to cover all the possibilities; there is no
other alternative. The dilemma might, however, be susceptible to the
other method of resolution.
Showing that the conjunctive premise is false is called “grabbing the
dilemma by the horns.” It consists of showing that at least one of the
conjuncts is false. The dilemma in the essay fragment above may be
susceptible to grabbing the dilemma by the horns. In this case, this
involves showing the first conditional proposition in the conjunctive
premise to be false, namely, “If determinism is true, then humans are
not responsible for their actions.” Someone might argue that although
determinism is true, humans are nonetheless responsible for their
actions. For humans are responsible for those actions that they cause
and are responsible because they do cause them. If this tack were
taken and incorporated into an essay, the result might look something
like this:

=== p. 154 ===

  dilemma. I shall argue that the first premise is false because the
  first conjunct, “If determinism is true, then humans are not
  responsible for their actions,” is false. For, even if determinism is
  true, humans are responsible for their actions, and are responsible
  for them because they do cause them.
There is a third way of dealing with dilemmas: to produce a
counterdilemma. This typically consists of producing a dilemma that
has the same disjunctive premise. The conjunctive premise keeps the
same antecedents; but the consequents typically are contraries to the
disjuncts of the conclusion of the original dilemma. The following
essay fragment contains a dilemma and a counterdilemma:
  It might seem that human existence is absurd. This appearance of
  absurdity is tied to the issues of the existence of God, human
  freedom and salvation. The following dilemma suggests itself: If
  God exists, then humans are not free to determine their own
  destiny; and if God does not exist, then there is no hope for eternal
  salvation. God either exists or He doesn’t. So, humans are either not
  free to determine their own destiny or there is no hope for eternal
  salvation.
  However, this dilemma does not tell the whole story, as the
  following counterdilemma shows: If God does exist, then there is
  hope for eternal salvation; and if God does not exist, then humans
  are free to determine their own destiny. Thus, either there is hope
  for eternal salvation or humans are free to determine their own
  destiny.
Producing a counterdilemma does not in itself refute a dilemma. It
does not show that the original dilemma is unsound. It is quite
possible for the conclusions of both the dilemma and the
counterdilemma to be true. However, counterdilemmas do indicate
that the corresponding dilemma is not cogent. One way of showing the
lack of cogency is to indicate that the dilemma does not take into
account all the considerations relevant to that issue. The above essay
fragment makes it explicit that the dilemma does not take into account
all the issues relevant to whether human life is meaningful or not. The

=== p. 155 ===

dilemma records only the downside of the existence or nonexistence of
God and not the upside. This shows that the dilemma, though possibly
sound, is not cogent.
Sometimes the counterdilemma indicates that the premises of the
original dilemma are contradictory. A story is told of a sophist who
agreed to teach a student to be a lawyer on the following condition.
The pupil would not have to pay for the lessons unless he won his first
case. When the student did not get any cases after his education had
been completed, the sophist sued. The pupil defended himself by
constructing a dilemma:
  If I win this case, I do not have to pay my teacher (since the teacher
  will have lost his suit for payment.)
  If I lose this case, I do not have to pay my teacher (since, by our
  original contract, I do not have to pay him if I lose my first suit).

The sophist rebutted the student with a counter dilemma:
  If I win this case, my student has to pay me.
  If I lose this case, then my student has to pay me (since he has won
  his first case).

The fact that both the dilemma and the counterdilemma are valid and
their conclusions are contradictory suggests that there is some
contradiction in the premises.
However, there is one more thing to notice about these two arguments.
The conclusions are not disjunctive propositions. If these arguments
were laid out more explicitly, the conclusion of the first would be,
“Either I do not have to pay my teacher or I do not have to pay my
teacher,” and the conclusion of the second would be, “Either my
student has to pay me or my student has to pay me.” Since the second
disjunct is redundant in each case, it is valid to delete it. This move is

=== p. 156 ===

canonized in another rule of inference, which can be added to the rules
of inference discussed in chapter 2:
                               Tautology

5 Scenarios
Philosophers often illustrate or prove a point by constructing a
scenario. As its name suggests, a scenario is a detailed description of a
situation that perspicuously establishes the intended point. Ludwig
Wittgenstein’s later philosophy was driven by compelling scenarios.
For example, near the beginning of the Philosophical Investigations,
he in effect says this:
  Suppose that a group of builders has a language with only four
  words, “block,” “pillar,” “beam,” and “slab.” One worker calls out
  one of these four words and another worker brings him the
  appropriate item. This can be thought of as a complete primitive
  language.
The point of this scenario is to show that while this kind of behavior
satisfies the standard account of what philosophers say a human
language is like, this kind of behavior, as restricted as it is, does not
give a fair description of genuine human languages. So the standard
philosophical account is inadequate. This allows Wittgenstein then to
go on to develop a more adequate account. Powerful scenarios are
vivid, lively, and sometimes somewhat satiric, as this one is.
But scenarios have pitfalls that must be avoided. There is a difference
between a mild satire and caricature. A caricature misrepresents a
position. And a misrepresentation can never be used either to prove or
refute a point. (To caricature a position and then to refute it is to
commit the strawman fallacy.)
Also the description of a scenario should not be tendentious or
question-begging. An example was given in chapter 1. It is tendentious
or question-begging to write this:

=== p. 157 ===

   Suppose that Smith and Jones have their brains interchanged. Then
   Smith has Jones’s brain, and Jones has Smith’s brain.
Since it is disputable who is who when brains are interchanged, it is
unfair for the author to identify one specific body as the person Smith
and another specific body as the person Jones. That issue has to be
discussed.
Another way in which a scenario can go wrong is to describe it in
insufficient detail. (Because of issues of space, all the examples I give
border on being insufficient.) When this happens, the author often
draws an unwarranted conclusion on the basis of what she has
described. The reader often does not notice the problem because he
tends to be cooperative. He wants to follow the author’s thought to
wherever she wants to lead him. This cooperativeness is required for
understanding what the author means. And often once this happens,
the reader simply accepts what has been said as fact, when it is not.
When this occurs, I say that the author has committed the fallacy of
the under-described scenario. Here’s an example:
   A common view among philosophers is that the survival of human
   beings obviously requires that a large majority of their views are
   true. Otherwise, their false beliefs would lead them to act in ways
   that would kill them off. But this common view is false. It is easy to
   describe possible communities that do quite well with (virtually) all
   false beliefs. Suppose there is a tribe that believes that everything is
   a witch. So they believe that some witches are good to eat; and some
   witches grow berries in the spring; and some witches bark; and
   some witches meow, and so on.
This scenario commits the fallacy of the under-described scenario,
because the author is not considering that in addition to the beliefs
mentioned, the natives also believe that this thing is good to eat, and
this thing grows berries in the spring, and this thing barks, and this
other thing meows. It might be the case that the natives never utter
sentences that directly express such beliefs or even consciously think
of them; but that does not show that the natives do not have them.
And the conclusive evidence that they do have them is their behavior.

=== p. 158 ===

6 Counterexamples
The method of counterexample is a powerful tool, frequently used to
refute a philosophical view. A counterexample is an example of
something that goes counter to some proposition or argument. People
know how to use counterexamples by the age of five or six. Children
often use the method of counterexamples in ways that cause parents to
cry. A frustrated parent says to his child, “You never pick up the
clothes in your room!” The child responds, “That’s not true. Yesterday,
I picked up my shoe and threw it at Mary.” The parent is refuted.
Sometimes counterexamples induce laughter, even if they are not so
intended. A friend of mine had two precocious daughters. The older
one once made some slight error, which the younger one pounced on
unmercifully. In a desperate attempt to defend herself, the older one
protested, “Nobody’s perfect.” The younger smugly pointed her finger
heavenwards, indicating the Almighty. Thus was her sister refuted.
Two types of counterexamples might be distinguished: propositional
and argumental. Propositional counterexamples are counterexamples
to propositions. Often these are refutations of some universal
proposition. A general assertion that all Fs are G is refuted by a
counterexample if it is shown that there is something that is F but not
G. The claim that all Fs have properties G, H, and I is refuted by a
counterexample, if it is shown that something of type F has properties
G and H, but not I.
One of the more famous counterexamples of contemporary philosophy
concerns a standard analysis of knowledge. According to this standard
theory, knowledge is justified true belief. That is,
  S knows that p if and only if
   1. p is true;
   2. S believes that p, and
   3. S is justified in believing p.
To refute this analysis, Edmund Gettier constructed two scenarios,
each of which satisfied all three conditions in the analysans above but
which were not examples of knowledge. Thus, he constructed two

=== p. 159 ===

counterexamples. The second and simpler of these went like this.
Imagine Smith is justified in believing the proposition “Jones owns a
Ford” (Smith has known Jones for many years; he has always owned a
Ford; Smith saw Jones driving a Ford an hour ago, etc.). Imagine that
Smith believes it. Further, suppose that Smith realizes that “Jones
owns a Ford” entails “Jones owns a Ford or Brown is in Barcelona.”
But now imagine that Jones has sold his Ford and is driving a rented
car; and that Brown, coincidentally, is in Barcelona. Then the
proposition “Jones owns a Ford or Brown is in Barcelona” is true;
Smith believes it; and Smith is justified in believing it. Yet, he does not
know it, because the grounds of his belief are coincidental to its truth.
Although this counterexample is a relatively simple one, simpler ones
can be constructed. Suppose Smith has known Jones for many years,
sees him regularly, etc. Suppose further that he believes the
proposition “Jones is walking across the West Mall” because he sees
someone who looks exactly like Jones walking across the West Mall.
And suppose that, although Jones is indeed walking across the West
Mall, he is behind a wall and out of Smith’s line of vision; that the
person Smith sees is not Jones but someone who looks, acts, and
dresses exactly like Jones. Then all the conditions of the analysans are
satisfied; yet Smith does not know “Jones is walking across the West
Mall.”
One of the funniest counterexamples occurs in a work of literature. At
the Mad Hatter’s tea party, Alice at one point claims that to mean what
one says is the same as to say what one means. The Hatter produces a
counterexample to this claim when he says, “Why, you might just as
well say that ‘I see what I eat’ is the same thing as ‘I eat what I see!’”
(Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland, Chapter VII). The March Hare
supports the Hatter’s view by producing still another counterexample,
when he says, “You might just as well say that ‘I like what I get’ is the
same as ‘I get what I like’.” Both the Mad Hatter and the March Hare
produce effective counterexamples, because each produces a sentence
that is of the same form as Alice’s sentence but is obviously false. Thus,
Alice’s sentence cannot be true in virtue of its form. It is important
that the alleged counterexample be obviously false. After the Mad
Hatter’s and the March Hare’s counterexamples, the Dormouse tries

=== p. 160 ===

his own hand at producing a counterexample to Alice’s claim, but fails
simply because the sentence he proffers is not obviously false. When
the narcoleptic Dormouse says, “You might just as well say that ‘I
breathe when I sleep’ is the same thing as ‘I sleep when I breathe’,” the
Hatter cuts him by saying, “It is the same thing with you.”
The second type of counterexample involves arguments rather than
single propositions. Here is an argumental counterexample involving
an immediate inference: one premise and a conclusion. Bertrand
Russell thought that the proposition “A genuine proper name must
name something” entailed the proposition “Only a name that must
name something is a proper name.” Peter Geach pointed out that this
is “a howler in modal logic” (Peter Geach, “The Perils of Pauline,” in
Logic Matters, Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1972, p. 155). It is formally like
arguing from the proposition “What you know must be so” to the
proposition, “Only what must be so is really known.” Concerning this
second pair of propositions, notice that the first proposition is true,
but the inferred proposition is false. Thus, the inference is invalid;
and, because the first pair of sentences exhibits the same pattern, the
inference there must also be invalid.
Suppose someone argues:

This argument may look sound. The premises and conclusion are both
true, and its form of inference is superficially similar to the valid
inference form of modus ponens. In fact, however, the argument is
formally invalid. This can be seen by producing a counterexample, for
example,
  If Plato is the author of The Critique of Pure Reason, then Plato is a
  great philosopher.

Notice that the premises of the argument are true but the conclusion
false. Thus, the argument must be invalid. It is an instance of what is

=== p. 161 ===

known as the fallacy of affirming the consequent. In essay form, the
original argument and its counterexample might be phrased in this
way:
  It has sometimes been argued that Plato was an idealist. For, if
  Plato was an idealist, then Aristotle was a realist. Aristotle was a
  realist. However, this argument is unsound. One might just as well
  argue that Plato wrote The Critique of Pure Reason. For, if Plato
  wrote the The Critique of Pure Reason, then Plato was a great
  philosopher. And Plato was a great philosopher. Therefore, Plato
  wrote the The Critique of Pure Reason.
One of the more famous argumental counterexamples concerns an
ontological argument for the existence of God. Anselm of Canterbury
had in effect argued as follows:
   (1) God is the greatest conceivable being.
   (2) Either the greatest conceivable being exists in the
   understanding only or it exists in reality also.

The monk Gaunilo produced the following counterexample:
   (G1) The Perfect Island is the greatest conceivable island.
   (G2) Either the greatest conceivable island exists in the
   understanding only or it exists in reality also.

The falsity of the conclusion shows that something is wrong with the
form of the argument. Since it shares that form with the ontological
argument, there must be something wrong with the latter argument
also.
Sometimes the nature of the counterexample is a hybrid of both the
propositional and argumental counterexample: One shows that a

=== p. 162 ===

proposition is false in the context of an argument, and the argument is
then shown to be unsound in virtue of this false proposition. Consider
this essay fragment that purports to present a counterexample to an
argument for abortion:
  Some people think that abortion is justified, because a woman has
  the right to do whatever she wants to with her own body; and
  having an abortion is doing something with her own body. The
  argument is unsound. One might just as well argue that punching a
  bystander in the nose is justified, because a woman has the right to
  do whatever she wants to with her own body and punching a
  bystander in the nose is doing something with her own body.
Notice how the same form of argument leads to an obviously false
conclusion. If the premises of the first argument are true, then so are
the premises of the second. But since the premises of the second
argument lead to a patently false conclusion, at least one of the
premises of the second argument must be false, and thus one of the
premises of the first argument must also be false. It’s not the second
premise, so it must be the first. Of course, it should be noted that from
the fact that the above argument is not sound (because one of its
premises is false), it does not follow that there is no cogent argument
in defense of abortion. Indeed, it is provable that for every true
proposition, there are an infinite number of bad arguments for it. For
example, here are just two obviously bad arguments for the obviously
true proposition that 2 + 2 = 4:
  If 2 + 2 = 4, then the earth is flat.

  Either Descartes is a philosopher or Plato is a philosopher.

Given these two outrageously bad arguments, it should be easy to see
that there are an infinite number of bad arguments for any true
proposition. Thus, a bad argument for a proposition does not show

=== p. 163 ===

that the proposition is false. Hence, although the above argument for
abortion is not cogent there may well be other arguments that are.
In any case, the method of counterexample is often powerful because it
allows for a kind of indirect attack on a proposition or argument that
could not very persuasively be attacked directly. It’s unlikely that
marshaling evidence against the proposition “A woman has the right
to do whatever she wants to with her own body” would persuade many
people who would otherwise believe it. The reason is that it is a
commonplace; it’s very widely accepted without argument. (Although
it is a commonplace, it is, I think, false. No one, male or female, has
unlimited rights over the use of their own body.) The principle needs
to be restricted in some way in order to be true. Human beings
perhaps have the right to do whatever they want in connection with
reproductive matters or privacy, or something similar, but not
unlimited rights. It is possible that those who espouse the principle
under discussion, do not literally mean it, but mean something that is
verbally similar to it such as, “A woman has the right to have anything
done to her own body that she wants to.” Yet even this principle is
dubious since many states have laws against masochism, self-mutilation, and suicide. Thus, an indirect assault on the proposition
has a much greater chance of success. That’s what the method of
counterexample provides.
Although a counterexample is a logically effective way of arguing
against some position, often it may not be persuasive because the
counterexample is not recognized as such. In these situations, more is
required. The author must get the reader to recognize that the relevant
proposition is false, perhaps by suggesting an explanation of why
someone might think the proposition is true. Such an explanation is
not proof that the proposition is false; rather, it psychologically
prepares the reader for recognizing the proof. This has been called
“diagnosis.” It is analogous to the Freudian maneuver of getting the
patient to attain insight into the causes of his neurosis. Diagnoses can
be quite controversial; they require a great deal of imagination, and
rarely, if ever, are definitive. Different people might believe the same
false proposition for different reasons.
Some counterexamples simply refute a theory. If the theory is

=== p. 164 ===

important, then the counterexample may be derivatively important.
This is especially so when the counterexample attacks some central
aspect of the theory, as Gettier’s did. If the counterexample does not
work by undermining a central aspect, it may simply point out that the
theory needs some fine-tuning, and that it can be fixed by fiddling with
the wording. In such a case, the counterexample is, perhaps, worthy,
but not especially important. The most important and powerful kind of
counterexample is one that does not merely expose a fatal weakness in
some theory, but actually suggests some promising line of developing a
different and more adequate theory. For example, recall the
counterexample about Smith thinking that he saw Jones crossing the
West Mall when in fact he saw only someone who looked like Jones.
To many philosophers the example seemed to indicate that knowledge
requires a certain causal relation between the belief and the evidence,
and spurred much interest in the “causal theory” of knowledge. One
feature that made this counterexample important to many
philosophers is that it seemed to show that there was something
fundamentally wrong with the analysis of knowledge as justified true
belief. That is, it seemed that the counterexample could not be avoided
simply by fiddling a bit with the wording or by adding a more precise
phrase (other philosophers, however, did try, and still do try, to fix the
original conditions). What also made the counterexample important is
that it suggested a direction in which the correct analysis of knowledge
might be found. The counterexample indicated that in order for
something to count as knowledge, the right kind of causal relation has
to hold between the belief and the thing believed. Thus, various
versions of a causal theory of knowledge were generated.
Counterexamples are a very important method in philosophical
argumentation. Sometimes a counterexample can be short and to the
point. A philosopher once said that the difference between human
faces and animal faces is that animals can’t change the expression on
their faces (he was thinking of ants, aardvarks, and pigs). His
colleague came back in a flash with “what about chimpanzees?” Other
times a counterexample takes a lot of time to develop. It needs a lot of
stage setting and explanation to show that it really is a case of what it
is supposed to be. I urge you to try to use them and label them as such
in your essays.

=== p. 165 ===

There are no simple rules for thinking up counterexamples. One might
say that one should run through a lot of examples in one’s mind until
one happens on a case that does not fit the proposition to be refuted;
but it is fair to ask, “How do you do this?” or “How does one do this in
such a way that one ends up with a counterexample and not just a lot
of examples that confirm the proposition?” In other words, thinking
up counterexamples ultimately depends upon imagination. Some
people are quite talented in this regard and others are not.

  1. Consider this proposition:
        Attending the “Million Man” March was morally permissible
        even though it was sponsored by a racist (Louis Farrakan)
        because it was for a good cause, namely, improving
        responsible behavior in African American males.
     Is the following proposition a counterexample?
        Attending the “Respect Our Women” March was morally
        permissible even though it was sponsored by a racist (the
        Grand Wizard of the KKK) because it was for a good cause,
        namely, improving responsible behavior in white American
        males.
  2. Formulate the issues discussed in (1) as an argument and as an
     argumental counterexample.
  3. Recall the passage:
        Some people think that abortion is justified, because a
        woman has the right to do whatever she wants to with her
        own body; and having an abortion is doing something with
        her own body. The argument is unsound. One might just as
        well argue that punching a bystander in the nose is justified,
        because a woman has the right to do whatever she wants to
        with her own body and punching a bystander in the nose is
        doing something with her own body.

=== p. 166 ===

   Make the premises and conclusion of the original argument and
   the counterexample explicit. Explain why both the original
   argument and the counterexample are valid arguments. Then
   attempt to either defend the original argument by showing that
   the author of the counterexample has misinterpreted the claim
   “A woman has the right to do whatever she wants to with her
   own body,” or revise the original argument in some way that
   avoids the counterexample.
4. Often famous counterexamples are more complicated than they
   need to be, and it is valuable to write an essay that simplifies or
   includes a simplification of such a counterexample. Select some
   elaborate counterexample that you have encountered in your
   reading. Try to construct a simpler one that has the same effect.
5. For an elaborate and influential counterexample, read Keith
   Donnellan, “Proper Names and Identifying Descriptions,” in
   Semantics of Natural Languages, ed. Donald Davidson and
   Gilbert Harman, New York: Humanities Press, 1972, pp. 356–
   79.
6. Gettier’s article generated a lot of interest soon after its
   publication. The following three articles concern various
   attempts to fix the analysis of knowledge and additional
   counterexamples. Read them for further examples of the
   method of counterexamples.
   a. Michael Clark, “Knowledge and Grounds: A Comment on
      Mr. Gettier’s Paper,” Analysis 24 (1963).
   b. Ernest Sosa, “The Analysis of ‘Knowledge that P’,” Analysis
      25 (1964), 1–8.
   c. John Turk Saunders and Narayan Champawat, “Mr. Clark’s
      Definition of ‘Knowledge’,” Analysis 25 (1964), 8–9.
7. Think of possible counterexamples to these propositions:
   a. All humans are mortal.
   b. All humans act out of their own self-interest.
   c. Whatever promotes the greatest happiness for the greatest

=== p. 167 ===

         number of people is right.
     d. All persons have bodies.

7 Reductio ad Absurdum
Reductio ad absurdum arguments are frequently used in ordinary
argumentation with no difficulty. For example:
   Many people believe the Enemy Principle, namely, that the enemy
   of my enemy is my friend, even though it is fairly obviously false.
   During the 1980s, both Iraq and Iran were our enemies. Further,
   Iran was the enemy of Iraq. So by the Enemy Principle, Iran was
   our friend. But that is absurd. So the Enemy Principle is false.
Although this argument is easy to follow, people often have difficulty
understanding why reductio arguments like this are valid and
difficulty in understanding reductio arguments in philosophy when
they are explicitly formulated.
Roughly, in a reductio ad absurdum argument, a person proves a
proposition by assuming for the sake of argument the opposite of the
proposition he wants to prove. The notion of a reductio argument
exploits an aspect of the notion of entailment. Recall that entailment
preserves truth. From a true proposition, only true propositions
follow. This means that if a proposition entails something patently
false, then that proposition must be false. Now, if that false
proposition is the opposite of the proposition to be proved, then the
one to be proved must be true. That is the strategy that reductio
arguments exploit. In short, if some proposition entails a false
proposition, then the first proposition must also be false and its
negation must be true.
As is obvious from this description of reductio arguments, it is crucial
to show that the entailed proposition is false. There are two ways of
doing this. The surer of the two ways is to derive a contradiction – any
contradiction. For example, if you can prove that the opposite of your
view of universals entails, say, that it is possible for an object to be in a
certain place and not to be in that place at the same time, then it is

=== p. 168 ===

clear that that view is false; and thus yours must be true.
In formal logic, reductio arguments are always derivations of a
contradiction. They can be represented in the following way, where p1,
. . ., pn are premises, q is the desired conclusion, and r is any derived
proposition:

Notice that the premises are listed in one column while the conclusion
q is listed at the top right in a half box. The first line of the derivation
∼q is the negation of the conclusion. The three vertical dots indicate
whatever (valid) inferences are needed in order to derive some
contradiction “(r & ∼r).” (It should go without saying that the
contradiction could be “(q & ∼q).”) Since assuming ∼q leads to a
contradiction, it must be false. Consequently, q must be true.
Here is an example that is inspired by an argument of Avicenna:
   There cannot be two Gods; that is, there cannot be two perfect
   beings. For suppose that there were two. Then one of them, call it
   G1, would have a property P1 that the other one did not have.
   (There must be such a property because if there are two things,
   there must be some property that distinguishes them.) P1 either
   contributes to making G1 perfect or it does not. If it does, then the
   other God G2 would lack a property that makes a being perfect and
   hence would not be God. If it does not, then G1 has a property that

=== p. 169 ===

  does not make it perfect, and in that case, G1 has a property that is
  superfluous to being perfect and hence is not perfect.
This argument can be represented as follows:
   (1) There are two Gods, G1 and G2. [Supposition of Reductio]
   (2) Either P1 contributes to making G2 perfect or it does not.
   [Tautology]
   (3) If P1 contributes to making G1 perfect, then G2 is not God.
   (4) If P1 does not contribute to making G1 perfect, then G1 is not
   God.
   (5) Either G1 or G2 is not God. (From 2, 3, 4 by conjunction and
   constructive dilemma.)

The other, and less sure, way to show that the entailed proposition is
false is to derive a blatantly false proposition. Hilary Putnam attempts
to produce such a reductio as part of his defense that the meaning of a
word, say, “water,” is not determined by the psychological state of the
speaker. For example, if there were a planet (“Twin Earth”) exactly like
our planet except that the mark “water” was used to refer to a
substance that had all the phenomenal properties that water has on
earth, but had a chemical composition different from H2O, then the
word “water” on Twin Earth would not mean the same as “water” on
earth. Now, since some have doubted this, Putnam presented this
reductio in defense of his view:
  Suppose “water” has the same meaning on Earth and on Twin
  Earth. [Supposition of the reductio.] Now, let the word “water”
  become phonemically different on Twin Earth – say it becomes
  “quaxel.” Presumably, this is not a change in meaning per se on any
  view. So “water” and “quaxel” have the same meaning (although
  they refer to different liquids). But this is highly counter-intuitive.
  [Supposedly absurd conclusion.] Why not say, then, that “elm” in

=== p. 170 ===

  my idiolect has the same meaning as “beech” in your idiolect,
  although they refer to different trees? (“Meaning and Reference,” in
  The Philosophy of Language, 4th edn, ed. A. P. Martinich, New
  York: Oxford University Press, 2001, p. 295, n. 2)
But is the conclusion absurd? At least one reputable philosopher was
not persuaded (Jay David Atlas, Philosophy Without Ambiguity,
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989, p. 136). So it is not as easy as you
might think to produce a proposition that your audience will consider
patently false and hence absurd. Consider the seemingly patently false
propositions that some philosophers have held:
  Nothing moves.
  Only one thing exists.
  All things are God.
  Material substances do not exist.
  “Sir Walter Scott” is not a proper name.
  Humans do not act freely.
Indeed, inventing an ingenious argument for a blatantly false
proposition is the shortest route into the history of philosophy.
Consider trying to prove the proposition “Some human actions are
free” by a reductio. One might argue:
  Suppose that no human actions are free. [Supposition of the
  reductio.] Then no human beings are responsible for their actions.
  But this is absurd. Therefore, some human actions are free.
The problem with this argument is that many philosophers will
maintain that it is not absurd to hold that human beings are not
responsible for their actions. They may offer their own reductio
argument that no human actions are free:
  Suppose that some human actions are free. Then some events,
  namely, human actions, have no cause. But this is absurd, since all
  events have causes. Therefore, no human actions are free.
What is a person to do? Know what the standard of success is. In

=== p. 171 ===

philosophy there seem to be two competing standards, though in some
cases they may not be mutually exclusive.
One standard is that a philosophical conclusion should not, if
reasonably possible, contradict common sense, that is, the generally
shared beliefs of nonphilosophers. This standard is motivated by the
position that the job of a philosopher is to justify or explain ordinary
beliefs, not to change them. This is what Wittgenstein meant when he
said, “Philosophy leaves everything as it is.” Philosophers who adopt
this standard have been called descriptive philosophers. Of course, it
is not always possible to justify all of our ordinary beliefs. Also, there
may well be no one set of nontrivial basic beliefs that all people have.
Thus, the aim here is an ideal that cannot always be achieved. In the
above example, “Some human actions are free” would fit the common
sense view.
The other standard is that a philosophical conclusion should not
contradict basic theoretical propositions. This standard is motivated
by the view that the job of philosophy is to produce the neatest and
intellectually most satisfying explanation of reality. While
philosophers in this tradition often disagree about what the best
explanation is, just as descriptive philosophers disagree about what
the content of common sense is, they agree that one should choose
one’s philosophical principles first and then use them to determine
what reality is like. Such philosophers have been called speculative
philosophers. A special form of reductio argumentation has been
called the mirabilis consequentia. It consists of showing that a
proposition “not-p” entails the proposition p. An elegant case of this is
an argument by Bertrand Russell against common sense:
   Common sense leads to science. Science says that common sense is
   false; therefore, common sense is false.
We can bring out the reductio structure more clearly if we formulate
the argument in this way:

   Proof:
   (1) Suppose common sense is not false. [Supposition of the

=== p. 172 ===

   reductio.]
   (2) If common sense is not false, then science is true. [Premise]

In an essay, this argument might be expressed in the following way:
   Common sense must be false. For, suppose that it is not false. If
   common sense is not false, then science is true, for common sense
   gave rise to science. And, if science is true, then common sense is
   false, for science says that the common sense view of reality is false.
   Therefore, common sense is false.
Students often find reductio arguments disorienting for a couple of
related reasons. First, you may wonder how a philosopher can use
some premise and then discard it. How can Russell prove that
common sense is false when he begins by asserting that common sense
is true? The source of this disorientation is the erroneous assumption
that the author of any reductio argument in any way asserts or
subscribes to the supposition of the reductio. Russell, for example,
does not assert that common sense is true; he merely supposes or
pretends for the sake of the argument that common sense is true. So
he never commits himself to its truth. He exploits or uses to his own
advantage the proposition that common sense is true, without
subscribing to it. He offers the proposition for consideration of its
consequences; and when he shows that it has absurd consequences, he
shows that it is false and consequently that his own view is true.
Second, a reductio argument can be disorienting if you think that the
author subscribes to the contradiction that he derives. What you must
realize is that the contradiction is not the author’s. He is reporting the
contradiction that follows if you reject his position. Consider this
reductio, again inspired by Russell:
   Descriptions are not names. For suppose they were. Then a name
   could be substituted for a description if the name and description
   referred to the same object. Now, since “Scott” and “the author of
   Waverley” refer to the same object and since George IV wanted to

=== p. 173 ===

  know whether Scott was the author of Waverley, it follows that
  George IV wanted to know whether Scott was Scott.
Russell, of course, does not believe that George IV wanted to know
whether Scott was Scott. He’s pointing out that that absurdity follows
if you accept his opponent’s view that names are descriptions.
One final example will illustrate how reductio arguments often
introduce a proposition to which the author does not subscribe and
which is actually the opposite of the conclusion he desires. For
example, one might argue that definite descriptions have no meaning
in this way:
  [1]Suppose that definite descriptions have meaning. [2]Then “the
  author of Waverley” means Scott (since Scott is the person who
  authored Waverley). [3]Further, if “the author of Waverley” means
  Scott, then the sentence “Scott is the author of Waverley” is a
  tautology. [4]But this is absurd. [5]Therefore, definite descriptions
  have no meaning.
Notice that the supposition, expressed in [1], is the contradictory of
the conclusion [5]. [1] is used as a premise; it is merely supposed for
the sake of argument. The author is not asserting or committing
himself to [1]. He uses [1] to show ultimately that [1] is false and that
the contradictory of [1], namely [5], is true. [3] is absurd. Since [3]
supposedly follows from [1], [1] must be false. Thus, the contradictory
of [1], namely [5], must be true.

8 Dialectical Reasoning
Dialectics has many meanings. It is sometimes used as a term of praise
and sometimes pejoratively. In either case, dialectics refers to the
product of a kind of reasoning. In this section, dialectics will be used
neutrally for a process of reasoning. The process consists of advancing
a thesis, producing arguments or evidence against it, advancing a new
or revised thesis that avoids the criticisms of the first thesis, but then
producing arguments and evidence against it. This process can go on
indefinitely. Sometimes the process involves the assertion of some
proposition, say, “Humans have free will,” and then, after it has been

=== p. 174 ===

criticized, the assertion of the opposite thesis, “Humans do not have
free will,” and then the next thesis is some more precise statement of
the original proposition, which avoids the original criticisms, say,
“Some human actions are caused by free will.”
The most famous practitioner of dialectical argumentation was Plato,
and on one interpretation he thought that there was no end to the
process because there are no final answers in philosophy. Whether
that is true or not, the dialectical process in a good essay will always
end before its word limit is reached.
I shall be using the term “dialectical reasoning” as the name of a
process, a style or a method of reasoning. In this sense, dialectical
reasoning is characterized by the following:
a. It is reasoning that proceeds by considering a series of topically
   related propositions.
b. Each succeeding proposition usually comes out of or is inspired by
   prior propositions.
c. Each succeeding proposition is supposed to be closer to the truth
   than any earlier one.
These three aspects of dialectic call for some brief comment.
Concerning (a), the semantic relation between the two propositions is
paradigmatically that of negation. G. F. W. Hegel, with whose name
dialectics is most closely tied, preferred one dialectical proposition to
be the negation of the other. However, it is prudent not to take this
feature too seriously. Often, one dialectical proposition is merely the
contrary of another. (Two propositions are contrary just in case they
cannot both be true, but both may be false.) For example, one might
move from the proposition that humans have a natural tendency to
do evil to the proposition that humans have a natural tendency to do
good and, after examining the deficiencies in both, eventually
conclude that humans have some tendencies to do evil and some
tendencies to do good.
Concerning (b), one proposition comes out of the prior proposition by
considering its logical consequences and in that way discovering the
limitations of the concepts expressed in it. Succeeding propositions

=== p. 175 ===

usually arise from one or more of the following types of revision:
1. negation
2. expansion
3. hedging
Negation is the classic Hegelian type of revision. A philosopher might
begin with the thesis “Universals exist,” and then negate this, in the
face of objections, to “Universals do not exist.”
Expansion is making more explicit; it is making a point fuller. A
philosopher who begins with the proposition “All humans are free”
may explain this by expanding it as “All humans are born free
although some are made slaves by law.” There are many forms of
expansion. Qualifying a proposition is one type. Jean-Jacques
Rousseau says, “Man is born free; yet everywhere he is in chains.” The
claim is pithy, but not literally true, even without cavils about his use
of metaphor. In the course of his exposition, it becomes clear that what
he means is “Man, considered as a creature in the state of nature, that
is, not restricted by civilization, is born free; yet in civil society he is
always in chains or unlikely to be happy.” Qualifying a thesis in this
way is sometimes called “nuancing.”
Hedging is weakening a proposition. A philosopher who changes
“Humans are necessarily two-footed” to “Humans are normally two-footed;” or changes “All human actions are free” to “Some human
actions are free” is hedging his proposition.
Concerning (c) above, dialectic has a pedagogical motivation. The
systematic treatment of the succession of propositions is supposed to
be an easy way of leading a person to the truth. The successive
consideration of a series of propositions shows why other possibilities
are not correct. This is especially helpful when the correct view is very
complicated. A dialectical treatment of a view should reveal why the
complicated view is unavoidable. For example, H. P. Grice in his
article “Meaning” considers one after the other the following three
propositions:
   an audience A to believe that p in virtue of x.

=== p. 176 ===

   an audience A to recognize that S intends A to believe that p in
   virtue of x.
   an audience A to come to believe that p at least in part because A
   recognizes that by uttering x, S intends A to come to believe that p.
It would be difficult to get a reader to believe (3) much less to
understand it, if she had not seen why Grice found it necessary to
reject (1) and (2) as too simple.
In a dialectical treatment of an issue, the later propositions are
supposed to be more certain and better grounded than the earlier
ones. They are more certain and better grounded because the
dialectical development has allowed the arguments for a thesis to be
presented, the objections to it to be aired, and either refuted or used to
improve upon the original thesis. Various sorts of vagueness and
inaccuracy of the sort discussed in chapter 6 have been eliminated.
Dialectical reasoning need not consist simply as a series of assertions
and refutations. Here is an example of dialectical reasoning in an
essay, in which the focus is on the meaning of a question:

               ON THE REASON TO BE MORAL
 People sometimes ask, “Why should I be moral?” and cannot seem
 to find a satisfactory answer. Perhaps it is because the answer is
 trivial or tautological. To be moral is to do what should be done. So
 the question in effect asks, “Why should I do what I should do?”
 The answer to this question is tautologous, “I should do what I
 should do.”
 Unfortunately, it is just as plausible that the question, far from
 having a self-evident answer, involves a contradiction. Someone
 who asks this question is wondering why he or she should act
 morally when it is against his or her self-interest to do so. The
 questioner is in fact asking, “Why is it in my self-interest to act
 morally when it is against my self-interest?” One wants an answer

=== p. 177 ===

 that says, “It is in one’s self-interest to act morally when it is
 against one’s self-interest to act morally.” And that answer is
 contradictory. Since people think it is dangerous to think or to
 teach that people should not act against their self-interest, it is
 obvious why the question is problematic.
 Now it seems that both explications of the question are defective.
 The second explication mistakenly assumes that one should always
 act in one’s self-interest; and that is not true. People often have an
 obligation to act against their self-interest. So taking self-interest
 into account, the question should be framed like this: “Why should
 I be moral when it is against my self-interest to do so.” The first
 explication is defective in a similar way. It mistakenly assumes that
 self-interest plays no role in the question. Taking the force of self-interest into account, the question might be framed, “When it is
 against my self-interest, why should I be moral.” The only
 difference between the forms of the two questions is their focus or
 emphasis, one trying to motivate moral behavior when the
 psychological force of self-interest is great, the other trying to
 defeat that psychological force when morality is called for.

In one form of dialectical reasoning, an author might combine
dialectical reasoning with a reductio. Consider this essay fragment:

 One might think that the only things that are real are things that
 exist. A moment’s reflection, however, will show that this cannot be
 so. For, if it were, then nothing would be able to change. For
 everything that changes changes from something that exists at a
 certain time to something that does not exist at that time. Since
 what does not exist is not real, by our original principle, change
 would be impossible. This is obviously absurd.
 Thus, it seems that the things that are real are things that exist
 and things that do not exist. Yet this position seems impossible as
 well. For it likewise does not explain how change is possible:
 Whatever changes exists. If what changes becomes what does not
 exist, then it becomes nothing; for what does not exist is nothing.
 But this is impossible. Thus, something like our original

=== p. 178 ===

 proposition is true. Yet, it must be modified to take the fact of
 change into account: The only things that are real are things that
 exist at some time. Thus, everything that changes changes from
 something that exists at one time, say t1, to something that exists at
 another time, say t2.

In this passage, there was a dialectical development that crucially
involved the three italicized propositions:
1. The only things that are real are things that exist.
2. The things that are real are things that exist and things that do not
   exist.
3. The only things that are real are things that exist at some time.
The move from proposition (1) to proposition (2) was motivated by a
reductio argument, as was the move from (2) to (3). (2) also seems to
contradict (1), and to incorporate that contradiction, although in fact
the two apparent conjuncts of (2) are not contradictory. (It is perhaps
this sort of appearance that led Hegel to claim that reality is
contradictory.) Concerning (3), notice that it is superficially closer to
(1) than (2). It seems to be a “return” to (1) – with a difference. (3) is
more complex and precise than (1). In short, there is a sense in which
(3) supersedes (1) and (2); and a sense in which (2) is the opposite of
(1).
Here’s another example of an essay that incorporates a dialectical
method:

 [1]All human actions are egoistic. [2]Everyone is motivated by his
 own narrow self-interest. [3]No one acts in a way that he thinks
 will be harmful to himself. [4]The current hedonism is evidence of
 this.
 [5]One might object that egoism cannot be true. [6]People who
 give to charity, parents who sacrifice for their children, soldiers
 who give their lives for their country, might seem to prove that
 egoism is false.

=== p. 179 ===

 [7]Yet, this is not sufficient to refute egoism. [8]People always act
 out of their own self-interest, even though that self-interest is not
 immediately accessible. [9]People give to charity to avoid feeling
 guilty; parents sacrifice for their children for the vicarious pleasure
 they receive from their later success; soldiers give up their lives,
 not for their country, but to avoid the shame of cowardice and the
 inevitable execution for desertion if they don’t. (This passage is
 inspired by Charles Landesman, Philosophy: An Introduction to
 the Central Issues, New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1985,
 p. 24.)

There are four propositions that are important for understanding the
dialectical structure of this passage. Sentence [1] states the thesis.
Sentence [5] tentatively denies [1] in the form of an objection.
Sentence [7] reaffirms the thesis in a general way, and prepares the
reader for sentence [8], which is a more precise reformulation of the
thesis, which is made possible in virtue of [5].
The purpose of dialectical reasoning should be rhetorical or
pedagogical. Leading the reader through a number of plausible
alternatives on some problem is supposed to make the understanding
of the true proposition simpler. The point is to instruct, not to dazzle.
As you become familiar with the writing styles of major philosophers,
you may notice that the dialogue form seems to lend itself to
dialectical reasoning. The give and take of discourse invites the
assertion of a proposition; its refutation; its replacement by another
proposition that takes account of the refutation by one speaker and its
opposite by another. Each speaker can refute the proposition of the
other and thereby lead each speaker to revise his thesis successively.
Nonetheless, not all dialogues exhibit this kind of dialectical
reasoning. Often the dialogue form is used merely to develop at great
length a thesis stated at the beginning and never revised.
A caution should be aired here. Although setting out one’s reasoning
dialectically is a good way to develop an argument, be careful about
trying to use the dialogue form to express a dialectical progression in
your own essay. It is a much more difficult form to write in than it
might appear. Only the best philosophers and philosophical stylists,

=== p. 180 ===

such as Plato, Berkeley, and Hume, for example, have succeeded with
it. One pitfall is cuteness. Do not substitute cleverness or humor for
thought and substance. Another pitfall is digression. A dialogue must
be controlled. Although interesting asides and philosophical subplots
might be introduced, it is important not to let the dialogue meander or
get off course, like the beginning of Tristram Shandy.
Dialectical reasoning is helpful for essay writing because it often
provides an easy method of organization. In the course of thinking
about your essay before you write, or in the course of taking notes
before drafting, people often fall into this pattern of thinking:
   On the one hand, X
   On the other hand, not-X, because of P
   Then again, X because of Q
   On the other hand, not-X because of R
Students often find this kind of see-sawing frustrating, and they come
to think that they don’t know what they think or what they ought to
think. And this tends to cause writer’s block. One way out of this
problem is to use the see-sawing thinking to your own advantage.
Don’t think of it as wavering or uncertain; think of it as dialectical! Use
it as the basic structure of the middle part of your essay.

  1. Construct short dialectical passage in which these sets of
     propositions play the key role:
     a. No human actions are free.
     b. Some human actions are free.
      c. All human actions are caused; but some human actions are
         not coerced.
  2. Write a 300–500 word essay in which the following dialectic is
     played out:
                   The Correct Criterion of Moral Behavior:

=== p. 181 ===

      a. The Golden Rule: Do unto others as you would have them
         do unto you.
         Objection: Different people want to be “done unto” in
         different ways. You may want a designer purse for a present,
         but the potential recipient has no interest in designer
         fashion.
      b. The Platinum Rule: Do unto others as they would have you
         do unto them.
         Objection: Some people desire the wrong things. A person
         may want you to supply them with a harmful drug.
      c. The Depleted Uranium Rule: Do unto others as they ought
         to be done unto.
         Objection: The goal was to get a criterion, that is, an
         operational test for moral behavior. The Depleted Uranium
         Rule is unhelpful.
      d. [Supply a conclusion.]

Note
1   The subject expressions of predicates are often restricted to
    semantically acceptable words and phrases. So, acceptable subject
    expressions for “x is a bachelor” are names and descriptions of
    human beings. Such restrictions are assumed for these and other
    examples.

