=== chunk: martinich-2015-philosophical-writing/ch6-content-constraints ===
title: Some Constraints on Content
source_pdf: docs/sources/martinich-2015-philosophical-writing/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 182-188
page_scheme: pdf
plan_page_start: 182
plan_page_end: 188
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 182 ===

Some Constraints on Content
In chapter 2 we discovered that validity and truth work together to
produce sound arguments and that to be persuasive a sound argument
must be cogent as well, that is, recognizably sound. Most philosophical
arguments are valid. Many philosophical arguments are sound. Yet
most are not cogent. Why? The answer is that the evidence presented
for their premises is either not of the right sort or not presented in
such a way that the audience recognizes its evidential force. If a person
cannot see that each individual premise in an argument is true, he will
not be moved to accept its conclusion.
It would be wonderful if there were some easy way of explaining what
constituted good evidence for a philosophical premise or how one
could go about finding it. Unfortunately, I do not think there is.
Philosophers often use the techniques described in the last chapter –
analysis, counterexamples, and reductio ad absurdum – but what the
correct analysis for some specific concept is, what a counterexample
for some specific proposition is, how to construct a reductio for some
specific conclusion, cannot be described in general and belongs to the
substance of philosophy. When people read about or do philosophy
themselves, their attention is directed to these matters, and style is not
supposed to interfere with understanding that substance.
With that disclaimer out of the way, I want to say something about
three issues that relate to evidence: the pursuit of truth, the use of
authority, and the burden of proof.

1 The Pursuit of Truth
As much as possible, you should try to ensure that what you say is
true. Do not strain to say something “deep” or say something merely
because you think it sounds deep. Anyone who can write 1,000 words
on a philosophical topic, without saying anything false, much less
outrageously false, has achieved something quite significant. Depth

=== p. 183 ===

will take care of itself.
You will not always succeed. Sometimes you will make honest
mistakes. This is something to be concerned about, but not to be
paralyzed by. Worry only about the dishonest mistakes. I have already
mentioned the temptation to write something false because it sounds
deep. Other temptations include the desire to write something false
because you believe your professor believes it. In the long run, it is
better to be committed to the truth than to what you think your
superiors believe is the truth. It is also often better in the short run;
saying something you do not believe often rings hollow and can be
detected by a sensitive reader.
In recent years some philosophers and many students have come to
say that there is no such thing as truth or the truth. (I don’t really
think that they believe this; but they say they do and they may think
that they do. Thinking that you believe something that you do not is
self-deception.) When they say that there is no such thing as truth,
don’t they think that it is true that there is no such thing as truth? And
if they do, then they are committing themselves to the existence of at
least part of the truth. My claim is quite modest. Compare it with what
the courts demand: “the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the
truth.”
Sometimes they claim only to reject Truth, with a capital “T;” but I
find their explanations of the difference between truth and Truth
either inadequate or nonexistent. Denying the existence of truth is one
of those things that strikes some people as sounding deep. I think it is
silly.

2 The Use of Authority
People rely upon authorities for many of the beliefs they have and the
decisions they make, and often rightly so. It is legitimate to rely upon
the predictions of weathermen about the weather – sorry, bad example
– upon the judgments of physicians about one’s health, upon the
judgments of physicists about the nature of the universe, and so on.
Yet, what makes this kind of reliance on authority justifiable is the fact
that the authority has good reasons for his or her views, reasons that

=== p. 184 ===

do not depend upon authority at all. Ultimately, the evidential value of
any authority is founded upon the quality of the evidence he provides.
It is a mistake to substitute an appeal to some philosopher’s authority
for his evidence. For example, consider this essay fragment, which
includes a misuse of authority:
  Universals are general objects that cause individual objects to exist.
  Universals either exist in objects or apart from objects. But, since
  Plato, the greatest or at least one of the greatest philosophers of all
  times, held that universals exist apart from objects, this must be
  true and they cannot exist in objects.
This fragment contains a misuse of authority because Plato’s greatness
as a philosopher is irrelevant to the nature of universals. Many other
great philosophers, e.g. Aristotle, held that universals exist in objects.
And their beliefs are equally indifferent to the issue. What is relevant
is the argumentation that either establishes or refutes the view that
universals exist in things. In textbooks on informal logic, an
illegitimate appeal to authority is called “the fallacy of authority.”
There are also legitimate appeals to authority. It is not possible to
prove everything in an essay or even a book. There are circumstances
in which an author needs either (1) to presuppose some result that
someone else has (allegedly) established or (2) to use some premise in
her argument that she cannot prove herself but which has been proven
by someone else whom the author can expect the audience to accept as
an authority. Here is an example of (1):
  Descartes argues that his existence follows from his thinking. He
  pursues the same general line of argument to prove that God exists,
  that he is not identical with his body and many other things. For the
  purposes of this essay, let’s assume that Descartes is correct. I want
  to argue that his position can provide a rational foundation for
  individualism and a democratic form of government.
In this fragment, the author uses the authority of Descartes to provide
the assumption she needs to develop the main point of her essay.
Concerning (2), citing the results of an authority can save you the time
and effort of providing what requires a proof but is not central to your

=== p. 185 ===

own project. This use of authority motivates the use of such phrases
as, “As Gödel has shown . . .,” which is simply an abbreviation for the
argument itself. This use of authority is effective, however, only if what
your authority “has shown” is both known to and accepted by your
audience. Referring to an obscure or widely doubted argument is
unacceptable. Also, when you refer to an author’s argument
approvingly, do not think that you are relieving yourself of some
burden and putting it on your authority. Rather, you are taking the
burden of that argument on yourself. If your authority’s argument is
defective, then your argument is defective. (If the authority’s argument
is good, she of course gets the credit since she devised it.)
While referring to an authority in order to take her argument for your
own is a way of abbreviating the argument and avoiding quotation,
sometimes quotation is desirable. An authority can be quoted either to
express an argument to which the author of an essay subscribes or to
express an argument the author intends to attack. Authorities can be
friends or foes. A favored authority should be quoted only if the author
cannot express the thought any more clearly or briefly than the
authority has already done. For if the author can present it better in
her own words, she should. Resorting to such quotation then is in
effect admitting a kind of failure. An authority can also be quoted if
her words have a compelling eloquence. Everyone who discusses
Hobbes’s views about the nature of man in the state of nature feels
compelled to quote him: “and the state of man is solitary, poor, nasty,
brutish and short.” A quotation might be compelling yet tautologous:
“Everything is what it is, and not another thing” (Bishop Butler) or
silencing, “Whereof we cannot speak, thereof we must be silent”
(Wittgenstein).
A disfavored authority should be quoted if it is necessary to prove that
you have presented her position fairly and accurately. It is very
important that you present your opponent’s position in its strongest or
most defensible way, even though you think it ultimately cannot
withstand the assault of your objections. To state an opponent’s
position unfairly is to set up a straw man. To refute that unfairly
stated position is to knock down a straw man. It is easy to knock down
a straw man; certainly it is not much of an accomplishment.

=== p. 186 ===

Students are especially susceptible to misusing authority because most
of their essays require extensive use of authorities, usually some
distinguished and very dead philosopher – Plato, Descartes, Hume,
Kant – and they do not know what it is about an authority that is
important. What is important is not his fame, nor his admirable
character, nor his possibly exciting life, but his arguments. As I have
indicated above, in most philosophy the Argument is all. And this
explains why philosophical authorities play such a large role in most
philosophical essays, those of professional philosophers as much as
those of students: great philosophers have constructed great
philosophical arguments that should first be mastered, then criticized,
revised, and extended. The great philosophers of the past set the terms
of philosophical debate, not because philosophers have an inordinate
respect for tradition, but because the tradition consists of the
arguments that philosophers, made great by their arguments, have
devised. As the distinguished historian of medieval and modern
philosophy Etienne Gilson once said, “The only thing that belongs in
the history of philosophy is philosophy.”
In addition to their use of the works of great philosophers, students
often have to research the secondary literature, that is, the books and
articles that have been written by scholars about the great
philosophers. Sometimes students are expected to report what these
scholars have said, sometimes also to evaluate it. In either case, what
is important is the evidence or reasons they give for their views. The
secondary literature should be investigated in order to discover
whether it throws any light on the primary topic.

3 The Burden of Proof
Connected to the issue of evidence and authority is the issue of who
bears the burden of proof in an argument. Roughly, the person who
asserts or otherwise relies upon the truth of a proposition for the
cogency of his position bears the burden. Recall, however, that it is
impossible to prove every proposition. In every science, some
propositions are taken as basic and ground-level. They are simply
assumed without proof. In geometry, these principles are axioms,
which traditionally were considered self-evident. Further, there are

=== p. 187 ===

many propositions, which, although they are not self-evident, need not
be proven every time they are used, since the evidence for them is very
familiar. For example, it needn’t be proven that the world is round and
very old, that humans use languages to communicate, and so on. On
the other hand, in most contexts you should not simply assume that
only one object exists or that nonhuman animals use languages to
communicate. These are controversial views and need support. There
are some propositions, however, that are neither self-evident nor
supported by evidence presented in the essay itself that might still be
used. Sometimes propositions are used conditionally or as
suppositions. That is, someone might try to prove that there is
empirical knowledge on the assumption that there is mathematical
knowledge. In this case, the person would be proving the existence of
empirical knowledge conditionally. He assumes for the sake of the
argument that there is mathematical knowledge in order to draw an
interesting consequence of that assumption. Such conditional use of a
proposition is legitimate so long as the inferred proposition is not
philosophically outrageous. (If the proposition is philosophically
outrageous, then the truth of the assumption may be subject to doubt.)
In one of its forms, philosophical skepticism tries to exploit the
requirement about the burden of proof. This brand of skepticism
purports to assert nothing. Rather than trying to assert or prove that
no one knows anything, the philosophical skeptic merely raises
problems for any claim that is made, often in the form of a question. If
someone says that an object looks red, the skeptic asks whether it is
possible that one has an ocular deficiency that makes white things look
red. If someone says that a tower viewed in the distance is round, the
skeptic asks whether it might not actually be rectangular. The skeptic
in effect maintains that while every philosophical doctrine is
indefensible because it has to satisfy a burden of proof and cannot,
skepticism itself is irrefutable because, by asserting nothing, it has no
burden. In writing an essay or engaging in any discourse, an author
forgoes skepticism, because she expects her audience to understand
what she is saying and presupposes that her words have meaning and
that she knows what they mean.
One implication of these facts is that an author should write in such a

=== p. 188 ===

way that she can legitimately expect her audience to understand what
she means. In particular, ordinarily words should be used in their
usual senses, and technical terms should be explained in terms that
the audience can be expected to understand.
Of course, an author always has to presuppose some knowledge on the
part of the audience. The trick is to be able to discriminate between
what can be presupposed and what needs to be supported by proof or
evidence. There is no rule of thumb about how to figure this out other
than by paying attention to what your professor says in class in order
to determine what he will and will not allow you to assume. You may
need to ask explicitly about whether certain things can be assumed.
You should think about whether your argument needs some
proposition that is evident or merely supportable by evidence. In order
to refute skepticism, for example, must there be a proposition that is
evident, or is it sufficient that there be a true proposition beyond
reasonable doubt? In ethics, is anything evident? Do any substantive
moral principles, such as “It is always wrong intentionally to say what
is false” or “It is always wrong to appropriate the property of another
person,” need to be evident or is it sufficient that they be more
reasonable than any competing principle? These continue to be
controversial philosophical questions, and how you answer them will
largely determine the type of argument you will need to construct in
order to support the thesis of your essay.

