=== chunk: martinich-2015-philosophical-writing/ch7-form-goals ===
title: Some Goals of Form
source_pdf: docs/sources/martinich-2015-philosophical-writing/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 189-207
page_scheme: pdf
plan_page_start: 189
plan_page_end: 207
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 189 ===

Some Goals of Form
Essays ought to be intelligible to the reader. If you have a great
argument and cannot communicate it to your reader, then it has no
practical value. Three of the most important ways to make your essay
intelligible are to make sure that it is clear, concise, and coherent.
Philosophers also strive for what they call “rigor.” These four qualities
are the topic of this chapter.

1 Coherence
One of the most serious failings in an essay is incoherence, which is
not the same as meaninglessness. Meaninglessness, as I want to use
the word, is an absolute notion. A sentence is either meaningless or
not, and it cannot be made intelligible simply by putting it in some
context. Coherence, by contrast, is relative. A sentence that is perfectly
meaningful in itself might be incoherent within the context of an
essay. For example, the sentence “Kant is the author of The Critique of
Pure Reason” is certainly meaningful in itself and not difficult to
understand; yet in some contexts it would be incoherent, as in this
essay fragment:
  Plato, who is the greatest of the ancient Greek philosophers,
  wondered how it could be that many different things could all
  belong to the same kind. Kant is the author of The Critique of Pure
  Reason. Given that Fido, Bowser, and Spuds are all dogs, they are
  in some way the same. What makes them the same?
The sentence about Kant is so out of place in this fragment that one
might be tempted to say of it that it makes no sense or even that it is
meaningless. But I am emphasizing that it does not lack sense and is
not meaningless but only incoherent in certain contexts. A sentence is
incoherent when it does not hang together with its immediately
preceding or succeeding sentence. A paragraph is incoherent when it

=== p. 190 ===

does not hang together with its immediately preceding or succeeding
paragraph. And an essay is incoherent when a large number of its
sentences or paragraphs are incoherent. Achieving coherence is not a
trivial accomplishment. Many famous philosophers and scholars have
failed. Consider this example, which occurs in a chapter about the
philosophy of Niccolò Machiavelli:
  Now although the revolution effected by Hobbes was decisively
  prepared by Machiavelli, Hobbes does not refer to Machiavelli. This
  fact requires further examination.
  Hobbes is in a way a teacher of Spinoza. Nevertheless
  Spinoza opens his Political Treatise with an attack on the
  philosophers. The philosophers, he says, treat the passions as vices.
  By ridiculing or deploring the passions, they praise and evince their
  belief in a nonexistent human nature; they conceive of men not as
  they are but as they would wish them to be. Hence their political
  teaching is wholly useless. Quite different is the case of the politici. .
  . . The greatest of these politici is the most penetrating Florentine,
  Machiavelli. It is Machiavelli’s more subdued attack on traditional
  philosophy that Spinoza takes over bodily and translates into the
  less reserved language of Hobbes. (Leo Strauss, “Machiavelli,” in
  Leo Strauss and Joseph Cropsey, eds., The History of Political
  Philosophy, 3rd edn, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987,
  pp. 298–9.)
From the first two sentences of the passage just quoted, the reader gets
the idea that Strauss will examine the fact that “Hobbes does not refer
to Machiavelli” since that fact is expressed by the main clause of the
first sentence. But Strauss’s discussion in the full paragraph suggests
that he intended to discuss something like what he indicates in the
subordinate clause of the first sentence (“Although the revolution . . .
prepared by Machiavelli.”). Unfortunately, his discussion is
periphrastic or round about. All he needed to say was that Spinoza
used Machiavelli’s arguments but expresses them in Hobbes’s
vocabulary.
A large part of coherence is continuity, that is, the way an essay moves
from one part to another toward its goal. An essay that meanders,

=== p. 191 ===

seemingly not directed to any particular destination, is defective even
if each sentence is charged with great rhetorical energy.
There are many ways in which coherence is achieved in essays.
Sometimes one part of an essay coheres with another because they
share a subject matter, as in this essay fragment:
  Plato holds that universals really exist. Universals then are part of
  the ultimate furniture of the world. If there were no universals then
  nothing else could exist.
Each sentence in this fragment is held together by its shared subject
matter: universals.
In addition to sharing a specific subject matter, sentences hang
together in other ways. One of these ways is through stock phrases that
mark the boundaries of large parts of the essay: the beginning, the
middle, and the end. Consider these:
  I begin/To begin
  I shall now argue/Consider the argument
  I conclude/To conclude/In conclusion
Even if these phrases are not particularly elegant, they are effective for
informing the reader of where he is in the essay, and all three together
tie the large structural units of the essay together into a whole.
Other linguistic devices connect smaller portions of essays, one
paragraph to another, one sentence to another, and even one part of a
sentence to another part of the same sentence. Such devices are often
called transitional phrases. Their effect is much more local than
phrases like, “I begin,” “In conclusion,” and “I shall argue,” which
control relatively large portions of text. Most of the linguistic devices
available for tying essay parts together occur in the middle of an essay,
where most of the twists and turns of the argument occur. The author
needs to supply her reader with road signs marking where the
subarguments are introduced and objections are raised and answered.
One good place for these road signs is at the beginning of paragraphs.
For example, consider the opening phrases of six successive
paragraphs from Charles Landesman’s Philosophy: An Introduction to

=== p. 192 ===

the Central Issues:
  An argument against hedonism was developed by G. E. Moore . . .
  The hedonist has two responses to Moore. First, . . . Second, . . .
  Another argument against hedonism . . .
  The hedonist replies . . .
  Thus hedonism is not refuted . . .
At the very beginning, Landesman makes dear what the main topic of
each of these paragraphs is. The reader should be grateful to the
author for keeping him informed of where he is in the essay. Your
professor will be similarly grateful – and may well express his
gratitude in the way you like best – if you use similar types of
transitional phrases.
Here is another example of transitional phrases at the beginning of
successive paragraphs:
  We shall begin our consideration of empiricism by turning to Locke.
  One might object to Locke’s empiricism by pointing out that . . .
  There is a twofold reply to this objection.
  The objector, however, might not accept this reply on the grounds
  that . . .
In addition to transitional devices that begin paragraphs, there are
also transitional words and phrases that are useful within paragraphs.
The words therefore and consequently indicate the conclusion of an
argument, often wholly within a paragraph. The words further,
furthermore, moreover, and in addition indicate that additional
evidence or information about some matter will be provided.
Pronouns and nominalizations can also be used to effect coherence.
Compare these two sequences:
  state than it is in the individual. Plato uses the premise that what is
  larger is more easily observed.

=== p. 193 ===

  state than it is in the individual. His argument uses the premise that
  what is larger is more easily observed.
Both passages express the same information. Yet the second coheres in
a way that the first does not. The coherence is achieved by the use of
two words: his and argument. The pronoun his requires the reader to
find its antecedent, which is in the prior sentence. Similarly, the
abstract noun “argument,” formed from the verb “argue,” requires the
reader to find its antecedent, which is also in the preceding sentence.
So, although abstract words should not be used for their own sake,
there are reasons for using them and one of them is coherence. Here
are three more examples of having one sentence cohere better with
another by changing a verb from one sentence into an abstract noun
and using it in the following sentence:
  Thrasymachus proposes that justice is what serves the strong. His
  proposition is refuted by Socrates.
  Camus recommends that we choose our values. His
  recommendation is a good one.
  Heidegger challenges contemporary philosophers to return to the
  roots of philosophy. His challenge has been met in unexpected ways
  by Derrida.
Virtually all the principles and devices for achieving coherence in an
essay that I have mentioned should be familiar to you from courses in
composition. What I have tried to do is to make you aware that those
general principles and devices apply to philosophy as well and to try to
move you to use the available devices in your own philosophical prose.

  1. Find and write out three successive paragraphs from some
     philosophical work that contain explicit transitional phrases at
     the beginning of each paragraph.
  2. Think of ten transitional words or phrases that might appear in
     essays. (Hint: look at some essays for examples.)

=== p. 194 ===

2 Clarity
It is quite possible for an essay to be coherent but not clear. Each
sentence might be obviously tied to every other without any of the
sentences conveying the author’s thought:
  Art challenges the prevailing principle of reason: in representing
  the order of sensuousness, it invokes a tabooed logic – the logic of
  gratification as against that of repression. Behind the sublimated
  aesthetic form, the unsublimated content shows forth: the
  commitment of art to the pleasure principle. The investigation of
  the erotic roots of art plays a large role in psychoanalysis. (Herbert
  Marcuse, Eros and Civilization, New York: Vintage Books, 1955, pp.
  168–9)
There is coherence here; but not, I think, clarity. Marcuse could have
made roughly the same claims in this way:
  Art is as important to life as reason although philosophers have
  often overlooked this fact. Art is primarily concerned with the
  satisfactions of sensuous experience. Even when constrained by
  specific artistic forms, the sensuousness of art can still be perceived.
  A large part of psychoanalysis has been devoted to investigating the
  sensuous satisfactions that come from art.
It is slightly embarrassing for a philosopher to preach about clarity,
because so much philosophical writing lacks that quality. Nonetheless,
clarity remains an ideal. Wittgenstein wrote, “Whatever can be said
can be said clearly” (Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus). Schopenhauer
wrote, “The real philosopher will always look for clearness and
distinctness; he will invariably try to resemble not a turbid, impetuous
torrent, but rather a Swiss lake which by its calm combines great depth
with great clearness, the depth revealing itself precisely through its
clearness” (quoted by Peter A. French, “Toward the Headwaters of
Philosophy: Curriculum Revision at Trinity University,” in
Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical
Association 58 (1985), p. 615). Joseph Butler wrote, “Confusion and
Perplexity in Writing is indeed without excuse, because anyone may, if
he pleases, know whether he understands and sees through what he is

=== p. 195 ===

about” (Joseph Butler, Five Sermons, Indianapolis: Hackett, 1983, p.
12). Butler may have overstated the truth; perhaps an author does not
always know that his writing is confusing, especially when he
understands his material thoroughly. Nonetheless, what Butler meant
is true in very many cases. Further, just because it is likely that an
author might not know that his writing is confused unless he thinks
about that very possibility with some care, it is all the more important
that he do so. For what Butler says immediately after the passage
above is right: “and it is unpardonable for a man to lay his thought
before others when he is conscious that he himself does not know
whereabouts he is, or how the matter before him stands” (Butler, Five
Sermons, p. 12). There is no excuse for a person who intentionally
writes in a confused way. Authors have an obligation to be clear.
Clarity is relative to an audience. What is clear to one person at one
time in one situation might not be clear to another person at another
time in another situation. What counts as a clear exposition of Gödel’s
incompleteness theorem for a Harvard logician might not count as a
clear exposition for a person taking his first course in philosophy.
Whether writing is clear or not depends in part upon what facts or
beliefs the author can rightfully presuppose that his audience
possesses.
How many times have you heard people say in frustration, “Well, you
know what I mean,” when they have repeatedly failed to say what they
mean about the most ordinary sorts of things. Think about how much
more difficult it is to say something exactly right about the most
central, important, and elusive of our concepts when no one has
previously said it exactly right. In philosophy, after failing to say
something correctly, it is never acceptable to fall back on the phrase,
“Well, you know what I mean.” If the audience knows what the author
means without him saying it correctly, then it is trivial; and if it is not
trivial, the audience cannot be sure of what the author means.
It is easy to say “Be clear” and difficult to say what clarity is. In the
broad sense in which I am using the term, clarity is a complex concept
with many dimensions. In philosophy, the dimension that stands out
most of all is precision. Precision avoids three things: ambiguity,
vagueness, and indeterminateness.

=== p. 196 ===

An ambiguous word, phrase, or sentence is one that has two or more
meanings. The sentence “Mary went to the bank” is ambiguous
between “Mary went to the financial institution” and “Mary went to
the river’s edge.” Although it is highly unlikely that the sentence just
considered would cause any philosophical confusion, there are
ambiguous sentences that have, and calling attention to the
ambiguities involved in them constitutes philosophical progress.
Psychological egoism holds to this proposition: Every person acts only
to satisfy his own desires. This sentence seems at once both obviously
true and outrageous. How is this possible? It is possible because it is
ambiguous. In one sense it means, “Everything a person does is
something that he wants to do.” In order to act a person must be
moved to act by something, and this thing that moves a person is
called a want or a desire. This is true and not very exciting; many
would consider it trivial. In another sense the thesis of psychological
egoism means, “Every person acts only to satisfy his own desires and
no one else’s.” This makes psychological egoism outrageous and false.
Gandhi, Martin Luther King, Jr, and Mother Theresa are three
indubitable examples of people who, although they did what they
wanted to do, were also moved to do things to satisfy the desires of
other people and only for the good of those other people. That is what
they desired. When the trivially true sense of the thesis of
psychological egoism is conflated with the outrageous and false sense,
the thesis seems compelling and profound. Psychological egoism
trades on this ambiguity. (See Hastings Rashdall, Theory of Good and
Evil, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1907.) Once the ambiguity of the thesis
is pointed out, psychological egoism is not persuasive.
Ambiguity should not be conflated with vagueness:
  Parent: Where are you going?
  Teenager: Out.
  Parent: What are you going to do?
  Teenager: This and that.
The teenager’s answers are vague, not ambiguous. They lack
specificity. Writers are often vague when they do not know how to

=== p. 197 ===

formulate their thought precisely although there is a precise
formulation of it. Vagueness should ultimately be eliminated in these
cases. What this means is that you should work to eliminate
unnecessarily vague words and sentences. This is not to say that
vagueness should not occur in the early drafts of your essay. To the
contrary, this is a good place for it. When you are first working out
your thoughts, write down whatever comes to mind. Many of these
things will be vague. That is okay. After you have written your initial
thoughts, revise. Eliminate the vagueness by reflecting more carefully
on the issue; also use a dictionary and thesaurus to help you find the
precise word that you want. (A dictionary and a thesaurus serve
different purposes. A dictionary defines a word; it should be used to
verify that the word you use has the meaning you think it has. A
thesaurus gives clusters of words that are related in meaning; it is
helpful when you are trying to identify the exact word you need and
can only think of a related word.)
So far I have been talking about avoidable vagueness. Some vagueness
is unavoidable. Some phenomena lack sharp boundaries by their very
nature; and they would be misrepresented if overly specific language
were used to describe them. One importantly vague concept may be
the ordinary concept of a person. Suppose that two people, Sharp and
Blunt, are operated on and their brains interchanged. After the
operation, which person is Sharp and which is Blunt? If you think that
the obvious answer to this question is that Mr Blunt is the object
consisting of Blunt’s brain in Sharp’s body and Mr Sharp is the object
consisting of Sharp’s brain in Blunt’s body (on the grounds that
whoever has a person’s brain is that person), then consider a related,
though different, situation. Suppose that Sharp and Blunt are operated
on; their brains are interchanged. However, in the course of the
interchange, all the brain states of each brain are also interchanged.
That is, all the original states of Sharp’s brain are now encoded in
Blunt’s brain, and all the original states of Blunt’s brain are now
encoded in Sharp’s brain. In this situation, Sharp’s body has Blunt’s
brain but Sharp’s brain states; and Blunt’s body has Sharp’s brain but
has Blunt’s brain states. Now which object is Sharp and which Blunt?
People might well argue about which is the right answer. Another way
to handle the question, however, is to claim that there is no right

=== p. 198 ===

answer, because the concept of a person is not so definite as to allow
an answer to this question. The situation is so bizarre that a solution to
it has never been built into the ordinary concept of a person. Now
nothing prevents us from adding to that original concept something
that does determine the answer. Only be aware that in adding to that
concept, we are thereby changing it, and, more precisely, are admitting
that the original concept had some degree of vagueness.
The point of all this is that some vagueness is built into some concepts
and that it is not a defect when your writing reflects this vagueness.
However, it is important to be aware of this vagueness. As Aristotle
said, “It is the mark of an educated person not to require more
precision than the subject allows.” (See Wittgenstein, Philosophical
Investigations, for more about precision and exactness.)
In addition to the avoidable vagueness that is objectionable in
philosophy, and the unavoidable vagueness that is to be
recommended, there is a third category, that of avoidable vagueness
that is to be recommended. This is a kind of vagueness that is put to
work in the service of style. Often, especially when a topic is difficult or
when what is to be said about the topic is quite original, a precise
formulation of one’s views, though intelligible in itself, might be
relatively unintelligible to an unprepared reader. In such cases, it is
often rhetorically advisable to begin with a vague statement of one’s
position and use it as the occasion to invite a more precise formulation
of it. For example, John Searle had astonishingly original things to say
about intentionality in his book Intentionality, most of which, when
formulated precisely, were unavoidably couched in technical terms.
Such terms would have been unintelligible to his readers early in the
book. Thus, as a first shot at explaining his views, Searle writes:
   All of these . . . connections between Intentional states and speech
   acts naturally suggest a certain picture of Intentionality: every
   Intentional state consists of a representative content in a certain
   psychological mode. Intentional states represent objects and states
   of affairs. . . . Just as my statement that it is raining is a
   representation of a certain state of affairs, so my belief that it is
   raining is a representation of the same state of affairs. Just as my
   order to Sam to leave the room is about Sam and represents a

=== p. 199 ===

  certain action on his part, so my desire that Sam should leave the
  room is about Sam and represents a certain action on his part.
  (Intentionality, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983, p.
  11.)
Searle’s use of “represent” and “representation” helps establish a
context that is familiar to philosophers. Yet philosophers have rarely,
if ever, spelled out what a representation is. Searle is aware of this
vagueness and is exploiting it. He goes on to say, “The notion of
representation is conveniently vague.” He admits to “Exploiting this
vagueness,” and acknowledges that the notion “will require some
further clarification.” He is in effect inviting the clarification, which
shortly after he provides at some length. After providing the
clarification, he points out that his use of “represent” and
“representation” could be completely eliminated in favor of the
technical explanations he provided in the clarification. Yet it is
convenient not to replace them because those vague terms are
shorthand for complex syntactic constructions. Notice, then, how
vague language can be rhetorically effective: it gives a reader an
intelligible entrance to an essay; it moves the essay forward by inviting
further clarification and encouraging brevity.
Indeterminateness is still different from ambiguity and vagueness.
Indeterminateness is a kind of incompleteness. It is symptomatic of
the lazy and half-formed thought. Consider the sentence “Humans are
selfish.” This sentence is indeterminate, because it does not specify
whether all or only some humans are being referred to, nor whether
they are always or only sometimes so. There are important differences
in the truth-conditions of these propositions:
  All humans are always selfish.
  All humans are sometimes selfish.
  Some humans are always selfish.
  Some humans are sometimes selfish.
There are all sorts of ways in which a proposition might be
indeterminate, and it is impossible to enumerate them here. So one
must always be on guard against indeterminateness.

=== p. 200 ===

Indeterminateness is also one reason why the passive voice is often
offensive. Some philosophers assert, “The world is constituted,” as if
this expressed a complete thought. But what we want to know is who
or what constitutes it, not to mention what “constitute” means in this
case. The sentence “The world is constituted” would be less
misleadingly written, “The world is constituted by________.” This
sentence schema would at least make clear that something is missing.
It is not sufficient to complete the sentence in this way: “The world is
constituted by consciousness,” because even this sentence does not
make specific what consciousness is involved. There are at least three
obvious possibilities:
  The world is constituted by God’s consciousness.
  The world is constituted by each human consciousness.
  The world is constituted by human consciousness collectively.
Which way is the original statement to be taken?
It is tempting to write indeterminate sentences. They are often pithy,
intriguing, and epigrammatic. They give the appearance of depth, yet
they are shallow. They lack the depth that comes from hard thinking.
And they unjustifiably spare the author the effort of thinking an issue
through completely. Don’t spare the effort.
After writing a draft of your paper, it is a good thing to go over your
draft and look up key terms in either a dictionary or thesaurus to see
whether there isn’t a more precise word for what you mean. Often the
more precise word is a bigger or an unusual one. If that is so, then use
it. But do not use the bigger word simply because it has more syllables.
(More precise words are often longer than related words because it is
part of the economy of language to use the shortest words for the most
common purposes, and the precision required for philosophy is
uncommon. Philosophers often need to use unusual words because
their thoughts are unusual.)
There are many other quirks of a person’s style that may inhibit clarity
or require the reader to spend a fraction of a second longer in order to
understand. Some of these are explained in other parts of this book.
I’ll end with one that is too common and easy to correct. Avoid

=== p. 201 ===

outdated words, such as these: aforementioned, thereof, whilst,
whomsoever.

3 Conciseness
Conciseness combines brevity and content. Being concise means
conveying a lot of information in a brief space. Brevity, perhaps, does
not call for much comment. It is desirable because it typically makes
fewer demands on the reader’s attention and understanding. An
author should realize that she is costing her audience the time it takes
to read her writing. A student’s professor is a captive audience; don’t
also torture him.
Although brevity is a good policy, it admits of exceptions. Sometimes
the rhythm of language recommends a wordier sentence. Also,
sometimes brevity approaches turgidity. That is, it is sometimes
necessary to use more, rather than fewer, words in order to stretch out
the content of a sentence and thereby make it more intelligible to your
reader. Short sentences, dense in content, are often less intelligible to
a specific audience than longer sentences with the same content.
Further, brevity does not guarantee efficiency; it concerns only how
something is said and not at all what is said. In determining the
efficiency or economy of a sentence or essay, one must consider
content in addition to brevity. A brief but vacuous sentence does not
communicate more efficiently than a prolix but informative one. Thus,
it is not in itself desirable to sacrifice content for the sake of brevity,
although this might be desirable for some other reason: to vary
sentence length or to prepare the reader for some complicated
explanation. Thus, brevity and content must be balanced. That is the
force of the admonition to be concise.
While a short sentence sometimes conveys more than a long sentence,
sometimes a long sentence is indispensable. Most concise sentences
can be viewed as expressing what many short sentences might have
conveyed. For example, the sentence
   Descartes has radical doubts about the ability of humans to know
   anything

=== p. 202 ===

can be viewed as conveying the same information as these three:
  Descartes has doubts.
  The doubts are radical.
  The doubts are about the ability of humans to know anything.
A large part of conciseness consists of just this kind of economy of
expression. But there is more to it than that. Sentence-combining
allows the author to express her thoughts in an organized way. The
syntactic structure of the concise sentence about Descartes’s doubts
make clear that the basic idea is that Descartes has doubts. The other
two ideas expressed in the sentence are subordinate. The idea that the
doubts are radical modifies the first, and the idea that the doubts are
about the ability of humans to know anything is a specification of
Descartes’s doubt.
There are all sorts of devices of organizing and subordinating in
natural languages. We have already seen that adjectival and clausal
modification can be used for this purpose. Sentence connectives are
another such device. Think about the difference between
  Descartes begins by doubting the existence of everything, and he
  concludes that he exists.
  Descartes begins by doubting the existence of everything but he
  concludes that he exists.
  Although Descartes begins by doubting the existence of everything,
  he concludes that he exists.
In the first sentence, the word “and” expresses that the ideas expressed
in each clause receive equal emphasis. In the second sentence, the
ideas are contrasted and there is more emphasis on the second than on
the first in virtue of the meaning of “but.” In the third sentence, the
idea expressed in the first clause is conceded by the author and the
idea expressed in the second clause is emphasized in virtue of the
meaning of “although.”
The nuances expressed by “and,” “but,” and “although,” and many
other sentence connectives, e.g. “because,” are important. Abuses of

=== p. 203 ===

them are obvious. For example, contrast this passage:
     Although Proclus is the second greatest Neoplatonist, Plotinus is
     the greatest. Proclus was born about AD410, but he died in 485.
     Plotinus’s philosophy was organized by Proclus into a series of
     triadic emanations.
with this one:
     Although Plotinus is the greatest Neoplatonist, Proclus is the
     second greatest. He was born about AD410 and died in 485. He
     organized Plotinus’s philosophy into a series of triadic emanations.
You should be able to figure out why the second passage is stylistically
superior to the first. Although I can’t explain all the different sorts of
sentence-combining techniques, you should pay attention to the
syntactic structures of your sentences to make sure that they are
emphasizing what you want to emphasize and subordinating what you
want to subordinate. You should experiment with different clausal
arrangements to see which one best conveys your thought.
One way to enhance conciseness is to rephrase some prepositional
phrases as gerund phrases. For example, rephrase
     The recognition of the existence of universals solves many
     problems.
as
     Recognizing that universals exist solves many problems.
And rephrase,
     The restatement of the argument of Descartes . . .
as
     Restating Descartes’s argument . . .

                                Exercise
     1. Combine the following sets of sentences into one sentence that

=== p. 204 ===

     expresses the same thought. You may add connectives, delete
     words, and change the syntactic structure as you please.
     a. Utilitarianism is a theory.
            The theory concerns ethics.
            The theory has a principle.
            The principle is that one should act to ensure the
            greatest good for the greatest number. J. S. Mill is the
            author of the principle.
     b. Plato is an author.
            Plato wrote the Phaedo.
            The Phaedo concerns the soul.
            Plato argues that the soul is immortal.
     c. Sartre is an existentialist.
            Camus is an existentialist.
            Marcel is an existentialist.
            Marcel is a Christian.

4 Rigor
Philosophers often espouse rigor, which they often explain to be clarity
(in some narrow sense), precision, and explicitness. Clarity, especially
as it relates to precision, has already been discussed. What about
explicitness?
Logicians are perhaps the greatest proponents of explicitness. Yet even
logicians retreat from the ideal when they introduce various
abbreviations, e.g. the iota operator, and conventions for dispensing
with symbols, such as omitting final parentheses from formulas of
logic.
Communication in natural languages, much more than in artificial
ones, gets along quite well with much less than total explicitness. Total
explicitness is inadvisable for a number of reasons. First, it would take

=== p. 205 ===

up an unreasonable amount of physical space. Second, totally explicit
language is more difficult to process mentally than much inexplicit
language. (Human comprehension is better when the human has to
make some inferences about the material than when everything is
explicit.) Third, the author may not be able to say explicitly what he
means. One skill needed for effective writing is knowing what should
and what should not be explicit. There are then two parts to what a
speaker or writer communicates: what he expresses and what he
implies. What he expresses is what is explicit in the words he uses.
What he implies is what he communicated in virtue of various features
of the context of his utterance. For example, consider this essay
fragment:
  Immanuel Kant is the author of several, long, classic works in
  philosophy, including his Critique of Pure Reason and Critique of
  Practical Reason. His distinction between noumena and
  phenomena and his views about the contribution that the mind
  makes to structuring reality have had a great influence on many
  distinguished philosophers for the last one hundred and fifty years.
Although the author does not say that Kant is a good philosopher, he
surely implies this in the essay fragment. He also does not say that
many philosophers have read Kant’s work; but again this is implied by
the context. It is highly unlikely that what the author says of Kant
could be true unless many philosophers had read Kant.
Although our ability to imply much of what we mean is a virtue of
natural language communication, it does cause problems. For it is
often difficult for an author to know what she can assume her audience
believes and also difficult to know when she has said enough to allow
the audience to draw the correct implications from what has been said.
In ordinary contexts, people rarely have any trouble deciding this
issue. It’s different with philosophy. Philosophy is so general that often
what one philosopher takes for granted another philosopher finds
absurd. Compare the beliefs of idealists with those of realists, for
example, or materialists with dualists. The student has another
problem. How can a student know what to make explicit and what to
leave implicit when her audience, the professor, probably already
knows everything true that the student has to say? (For the answer to

=== p. 206 ===

this question, see chapter 1, section 1, “The Professor As Audience.”)
Being too explicit can result in clumsy writing. Consider this passage
from G. E. Moore, who has just finished discussing the differences
between such assertions as “I am standing up,” “I have clothes on,”
and “I am speaking in a fairly loud voice”:
  But in spite of these, and other, differences between those seven or
  eight different assertions, there are several important respects in
  which they are all alike.
  (1) In the first place: All of those seven or eight different assertions,
  which I made at the beginning of this lecture, were alike in this
  respect, namely, that every one of them was an assertion, which,
  though it wasn’t in fact false, yet might have been false. For
  instance, consider the time at which I asserted that I was standing
  up. It is certainly true that at that very time I might have been
  sitting down, though in fact, I wasn’t; and if I had been sitting down
  at that time, then my assertion that I was standing up would have
  been false. Since, therefore, I might have been sitting down at that
  time, it follows that my assertion that I was standing up was an
  assertion which might have been false, though it wasn’t. And the
  same is obviously true of all the other assertions I made. At the time
  when I said I was in a room, I might have been in the open air; at
  the time when I said I had clothes on, I might have been naked; and
  so on, in all the other cases. (From G. E. Moore, “Certainty,”
  Philosophical Papers, New York: Collier Books, 1966, pp. 225–6.)
In short, what should be explicit is what is most important. What
should be implied is what can reasonably be assumed either as
background information shared by both author and reader or as
obviously following from what is explicit in the text.

  1. The passage above from G. E. Moore contains more than 200
     words. Rewrite it more concisely. Use no more than 150 words.
  2. Make the following sentences more concise:

=== p. 207 ===

a. “The first point is a point which embraces many other
   points” (from G. E. Moore, “A Defence of Common Sense,”
   in Philosophical Papers, New York: 1959, p. 32).
b. By using the recognition of the fact that Descartes in no way
   refutes the philosophical view of skepticism, we can get a
   better handle on the proper conditions underlying the
   concept of knowledge.

