=== chunk: martinich-2015-philosophical-writing/ch9-how-to-read ===
title: How to Read a Philosophical Work
source_pdf: docs/sources/martinich-2015-philosophical-writing/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 223-232
page_scheme: pdf
plan_page_start: 223
plan_page_end: 232
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 223 ===

How to Read a Philosophical Work
There are two reasons to include a chapter on reading in a book about
writing well. First, everyone needs to read something in order to know
how to write an essay. While some philosophers read more than
others, every major philosopher since Plato has read the work of
another philosopher before beginning to write philosophy. Second,
one way to learn how to write is by paying attention to how a good
writer writes. How does she structure a sentence? How do individual
sentences fit together into a paragraph? How do the paragraphs fit
together? What kinds of words does she use, abstract or concrete,
precise or imprecise?
I shall focus on reading article-length philosophical texts because their
length is substantial but not overwhelming.

1 Find the Thesis Sentence
Ideally, an article has a thesis sentence that states what the author
wants to prove. Ideally, the thesis sentence should come close to the
beginning of the article. Since the thesis statement should be the main
organizing principle for the article, it is important to identify it. The
best way to do this is often to read the article through fairly quickly.
Look for words that announce that the thesis is about to be stated.
This includes such phrases as
   In this article, I shall argue that . . .
   The aim of this article is . . .
   My thesis is . . .
   I want to prove . . .
Sometimes the thesis is introduced by some background information.
But it should still be stated close to the beginning of the article, as it is
in W. V. Quine’s classic article, “Two Dogmas of Empiricism.”

=== p. 224 ===

  [a]Modern empiricism has been conditioned in large part by two
  dogmas. [b]One is a belief in some fundamental cleavage between
  truths which are analytic, [c]or grounded in meanings
  independently of matters of fact, and [d]truths which are synthetic,
  or [e]grounded in fact. [f]The other dogma is reductionism: the
  belief that each meaningful statement is equivalent to some logical
  construct upon terms which refer to immediate experiences.
  [g]Both dogmas, I shall argue, are ill-founded.
[a] locates the article within the area of empiricism; its ending “two
dogmas” further narrows the topics and invites a specification of what
those dogmas are. [b]–[f] are statements of those dogmas. [b] and [d]
introduce technical terms and they are immediately explained by [c]
and [e]. [f] is the last sentence that provides background. Quine then
immediately states his thesis in [g]. This opening is a masterpiece of
clarity and economy.
Here’s a similar example from another classic article:
  This paper consists of two parts: the first has an expository
  character, and the second is rather polemical.
  In the first part I want to summarize in an informal way the main
  results of my investigations concerning the definition of truth …
  [The rest of this paragraph and the beginning of the next paragraph
  have been deleted.]
  In the second part of the paper I should like to express my views
  concerning these objections.1

 Identify the main thesis in the passage below, selected from the
 article “Meaning,” by H. P. Grice. State the main thesis in 25 words
 or fewer. Then state the main thesis in 35–75 words.
 Consider the following sentences:
    “Those spots mean (meant) measles”
    “Those spots didn’t mean anything to me, but to the doctor they

=== p. 225 ===

    meant measles.”
    “The recent budget means that we shall have a hard year.”
    1. I cannot say, “Those spots meant measles, but he hadn’t got
       measles,” and I cannot say, “The recent budget means that
       we shall have a hard year, but we shan’t have.” That is to say,
       in cases like the above, x meant that p and x means that p
       entail p.
    2. I cannot argue from “Those spots mean (meant) measles” to
       any conclusion about “What is (was) meant by those spots”;
       for example, I am not entitled to say, “What was meant by
       those spots was that he had measles.” Equally I cannot draw
       from the statement about the recent budget the conclusion
       “What is meant by the recent budget is that we shall have a
       hard year.”
…
Now contrast the above sentences with the following:
    “Those three rings on the bell (of the bus) mean that the bus is
    full.”
    “That remark, ‘Smith couldn’t get on without his trouble and
    strife,’ meant that Smith found his wife indispensable.”
    1. I can use the first of these and go on to say, “But it isn’t in
       fact full – the conductor has made a mistake”; and I can use
       the second and go on, “But in fact Smith deserted her seven
       years ago.” That is to say, here x means that p and x meant
       that p do not entail p.
    2. I can argue from the first to some statement about “what is
       (was) meant” by the rings on the bell and from the second to
       some statement about “what is (was) meant” by the quoted
       remark.
    …
    When the expressions “means,” “means something,” “means
    that,” are used in the kind of way in which they are used in the

=== p. 226 ===

  first set of sentences, I shall speak of the sense, or senses, in
  which they are used, as the natural sense, or senses, of the
  expressions in question. When the expressions are used in the
  second set of sentences, I shall speak of the sense, or senses, in
  which they are used, as the nonnatural sense, or senses, of the
  expressions in question. I shall use the abbreviation “meansNN”
  to distinguish the nonnatural sense or senses.
  …
  I do not want to maintain that all our uses of “mean” fall easily,
  obviously, and tidily into one of the two groups I have
  distinguished; but I think that in most cases we should be at
  least fairly strongly inclined to assimilate a use of “mean” to one
  group rather than to the other. The question now arises is this:
  “What more can be said about the distinction between the cases
  where we should say that the word is applied in a natural sense
  and the cases where we should say that the word is applied in a
  nonnatural sense?”
  …
  I want first to consider briefly, and reject, what I might term a
  causal type of answer to the question, “What is meaningNN?”
  We might try to say, for instance, more or less with C. L.
  Stevenson,2 that for x to meanNN something, x must have
  (roughly) a tendency to produce in an audience some attitude
  (cognitive or otherwise) and a tendency, in the case of a speaker,
  to be produced by that attitude, these tendencies being
  dependent on “an elaborate process of conditioning attending
  the use of the sign in communication.”3 This clearly will not do.
  … [Several pages of criticism are omitted.]
I will now try a different and, I hope, more promising line. If we
can elucidate the meaning of
  “x meantNN something (on a particular occasion)” and
  “x meantNN that so-and-so (on a particular occasion)”

=== p. 227 ===

    … this might reasonably be expected to help us with
    “x meansNN (timeless) something (that so-and-so),”
    “A meansNN (timeless) by x something (that so-and-so ),”
 and with the explication of “means the same as,” “understands,”
 “entails,” and so on.
 A first shot would be to suggest that “x meantNN something” would
 be true if x was intended by its utterer to induce a belief in some
 “audience” and that to say what the belief was would be to say what
 x meantNN. This will not do.
 … [Several pages of criticism and revised analyses are omitted.]
 Perhaps then we may make the following generalizations:
     1. “A meantNN something by x” is (roughly) equivalent to “A
        intended the utterance of x to produce some effect in an
        audience by means of the recognition of this intention …
     2. … x meansNN (timeless) something (that so-and-so),” might
        as a first shot be equated with some statement or disjunction
        of statements about what “people” (vague) intend (with
        qualifications about “recognition”) to effect by x. …

Not every philosophical article has the proof of a substantive thesis as
its goal. Some are expository; they are written to clarify issues without
proving which of several competing views are correct. In these cases,
the main topic of the article may be formulated as a question or set of
questions early in the article such as this:
  What is meaning? What is the meaning of a word? How do people
  mean things with words? Are meanings objects or actions?
Authors sometimes summarize their results around the middle of the
essay. They might use expressions like this:
  My aim so far has been to show . . .

=== p. 228 ===

   I have tried to show how . . .
The most common place for philosophers to state their thesis is in the
final section or paragraph of the article. While I think this is a bad
practice, you need to recognize that it is a fact when you go looking for
the thesis.

2 Precision of Words, Phrases, and Sentences
In order to understand what an author is saying, it’s necessary to
distinguish between (i) what the author is asserting or affirming in her
own right to be true and (ii) what she is asserting or affirming to seem
or appear to be true. Very often, the very things that the author says
seem or appear to be true are things that the reader will believe to be
true. So the reader may be inclined to think that when the author says,
   It seems to be the case that p
   It appears that p
the author means to assert that p when in fact the author is not
asserting that p, but is calling attention to the appearance that it is
true that p in order to show that really it is not the case that p.
   It seems/appears that the sun moves around the earth. The
   evidence for this are our own senses and the testimony of how
   things appear to everyone we know . . . However, . . .
Notice that somewhere following the assertion of what seems or
appears to be the case there will be some word or phrase (“However,”
or “This appearance is false” or “This evidence is inconclusive”) that
indicates that what seems or appears to be the case is not.
We should not forget, however, that sometimes what appears to be the
case actually is the case. “This meat seems to be rancid,” “The patient
appears to be recovering,” are sentences that express a fact that is
consistent with the meat being rancid and the patient actually
recovering.
In order to distinguish between the cases of false or misleading
appearance from the other cases of appearance, some authors will

=== p. 229 ===

combine the verb “seem” or “appear” with the subjunctive mood:
   It may/might seem/appear that the sun moves around the earth.
In these cases, it is highly likely that the author rejects the
propositional content of the sentence. (But not always. See the next
paragraph for an example.)
I have been talking about verb phrases in the third person, “it
appears/seems that” and “it may seem that” with no reference at all to
the author. If the verbs “appear” or “seem” occur with some reference
to the first person, as in “it appears/seems to me that,” then the import
of the verb phrase is quite different.
Suppose that the author is trying to throw some proposition into
doubt. Suppose the proposition is this: “A person can pretend to do
something purely by imagining that she is doing something.” Since the
burden of proof always rests on the person who is asserting a
proposition, the author, who merely finds the proposition of doubtful
truth, does not have to prove the contradictory of it: “It is not the case
that a person can pretend to do something purely by imagining that
she is doing something.” To cast doubt on a proposition, it is enough
for the author to prove, “It seems/appears to me that it is not the case
that a person can pretend to do something purely by imagining that
she is doing something.”

3 Proving the Case
After identifying the main thesis of the article, the reader should try to
figure out how the author proves his case. Philosophers often give the
impression that their primary modes of reasoning are analysis and
deductive argumentation. But there are at least two other modes that
are probably equally important.
One I’ll call “insight.” Plato, Thomas Hobbes, Søren Kierkegaard, and
Friedrich Nietzsche are four philosophers who are often insightful. An
insight is an observation that is easy to understand once it is pointed
out; but it is one that people tend not to think of themselves, even
though it illuminates or clarifies something important. Here are four
examples. (1) Plato wrote that it is better to suffer an injustice than to

=== p. 230 ===

do an injustice (because it is unjust to do an injustice). Think about the
many people who act unjustly to prevent what they think is an
impending injustice against them. Similarly, one may not do evil so
that good may come of it (because it is evil to do evil). (2) Thomas
Hobbes wrote that to say that God appeared to me in a dream is the
same as to say that I dreamed that God appeared to me. (Just as the
latter has no evidential value, neither does the former.) (3)
Kierkegaard wrote that people are condemned to live their life
forwards but to understand it backwards. (What we want to do is
affected by what we think the importance or benefit of it will be; but
we can only know that after the fact.) (4) Friedrich Nietzsche says that
to declare that this world is a vale of tears and that there is another
better world than this one is to slander this world.
When a philosopher is trying to write something insightful, you need
to consider whether what she is saying is universally true, true in only
some or many cases, or false. In addition to being a great poet, John
Milton was a philosopher. In Paradise Lost, Satan said, “It is better to
reign in hell than to serve in heaven.” Is that true? Would it be better
to be the leader of Al Qaida than to be an employee of a human rights
group? Satan also said, “The mind is its own place, and in itself can
make a heaven of hell, a hell of heaven.”

 Is what Satan said true? Are there confirming examples? What
 does that show? Are their disconfirming examples? What does that
 show?

The other mode of reasoning that is important to philosophy is
inference to the best explanation, that is, giving the best explanation
one can for some phenomenon. Here is a seemingly trivial example.
On Monday, you go into a classroom and see some students who look
very much like students you saw in that classroom the previous week.
Are the Monday students the same ones you saw last week in that
classroom? It is possible that each of last week’s students has a twin

=== p. 231 ===

who is attending class today. Possible, but ordinarily a poor
explanation of the similarity. The best explanation is that the Monday
students are the same ones as last week’s. You may be able to see how
pervasive and important these judgments are if you consider that you
also have to decide whether the classroom is the same, the streets you
walked on are the same. If the author is making an inference to the
best explanation, ask yourself whether there are other explanations
that are just as good or better.
Let’s return to an article that contains an argument. Is there an
argument? If so, then the author must be expressing her premises
somewhere. These may be indicated by words and phrases such as, “I
need the premise,” “My first premise is.” But a premise may not be
introduced so explicitly.
Sometimes something may look like one of the author’s premises but
in fact is not. Suppose an author argued for mind/body dualism, and
wrote “Plato, the first defender of mind/body dualism, argued that the
soul is a substance because it is simple.” The reader might mistakenly
think that the author is using the same premise if the reader does not
notice that the author later wrote, “But the concept of substance-simplicity has unsolvable problems.” Sometimes an author will use the
subjunctive mood or “it seems” – “One may think (or: it seems) that
the existence of the mind can be proved by noticing that a human
being is conscious of itself” – in order to introduce a possibility that
will later be rejected: “However, self-consciousness does not … .” And
there are other cases in which the author comes to endorse the
premise that was introduced with the subjunctive mood or “it seems”:
“Self-consciousness is indeed the premise that proves that the mind is
independent of the body.” The best advice is to read slowly and
carefully.
Similar to the distinction between (i) what the author is asserting or
affirming in her own right to be true and (ii) what she is asserting or
affirming to seem or appear to be true is the distinction between
a. what the author is asserting or affirming in her own right to be true
   and
b. what she is representing as the view of her opponent.

=== p. 232 ===

One article begins as follows:
   W. V. Quine is a realist. He believes that substances that exist
   independently of perception exist.
This gives the impression that the author believes these propositions.
She does not. Her next sentence is:
   I shall argue against this position.
The indicative mood, “is” and “does not believe,” is used by the author
for rhetorical effect. The two introductory sentences are designed to
set up the audience for a striking reversal: the author disagrees. (A
problem with the sentence, “I shall argue against this position,” is that
it is not clear whether the author does not believe that Quine is a
realist or that she does not believe that realism is true. Further
sentences should resolve the lack of clarity.

Notes
1 Alfred Tarski, “The Semantic Conception of Truth and the
   Foundations of Semantics,” Philosophy and Phenomenological
   Research 4 (1944); reprinted in A. P. Martinich, ed., The
   Philosophy of Language, 5th edn (New York: Oxford University
   Press), p. 69.
2 Ethics and Language (New Haven: 1944), ch. 3.

3 Ibid., p. 57.

