=== chunk: ricoeur-1981-hermeneutics-human-sciences/ch7-appropriation ===
title: Appropriation
source_pdf: docs/sources/ricoeur-1981-hermeneutics-human-sciences/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 195-207
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 144
plan_page_end: 156
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 144 ===

                              Appropriation

                                        B
This essay will attempt to explicate a key idea which governs the methodology of interpretation. It concerns the way in which a text is addressed to
someone. Elsewhere1 we have noted that the writing–reading relation is
distinguished from the speaking–hearing relation not only in terms of the
relation to the speaker, but also in terms of the relation to the audience.
We have asked: for whom does one write? and we have answered: for
anyone who can read. We have also spoken of the ‘potentialisation’ of the
audience, which is no longer the partner in dialogue but the unknown
reader that the text procures. The culmination of reading in a concrete reader
who appropriates the meaning will thus constitute the theme of this essay.
   It is obvious that we shall rediscover the old problem of the role of
subjectivity in understanding and, therefore, the problem of the hermeneutical circle. But this problem is presented in new terms, as a result of the
fact that it has been postponed for so long. Instead of considering it as
the first problem, we have pushed it back to the end of our investigation.
What we have said in other essays about the notion of interpretation is, in
this respect, decisive. If it is true that interpretation concerns essentially the
power of the work to disclose a world, then the relation of the reader to the
text is essentially his relation to the kind of world which the text presents.
The theory of appropriation which will now be sketched follows from the
displacement undergone by the whole problematic of interpretation: it will
be less an intersubjective relation of mutual understanding than a relation
of apprehension applied to the world conveyed by the work. A new theory
of subjectivity follows from this relation. In general we may say that
appropriation is no longer to be understood in the tradition of philosophies
of the subject, as a constitution of which the subject would possess the key.
To understand is not to project oneself into the text; it is to receive an
enlarged self from the apprehension of proposed worlds which are the

1   See ‘The hermeneutical function of distanciation’, in this volume.

=== p. 145 ===

genuine object of interpretation. Such is the general line of this essay, which
will be pursued in detail as follows.
(1) To begin with, the necessity of the concept of appropriation will be
shown. It will be introduced as the counterpart of a concept of distancia-tion which is linked to any objective and objectifying study of a text.
Hence the first section: ‘distanciation and appropriation’.
(2) Then we shall take up the relation between the concept of appropriation and that of the revelation of a world. Following Gadamer’s analysis
in Truth and Method, we shall introduce the theme of ‘play’. This theme
will serve to characterise the metamorphosis which, in the work of art, is
undergone not only by reality but also by the author (writer and artist), and
above all (since this is the point of our analysis) by the reader or the subject
of appropriation. Appropriation will thus appear as the ‘playful’ transposition of the text, and play itself will appear as the modality appropriate to
the reader potentialis, that is, to anyone who can read.
(3) Next we shall identify the illusions and errors which the concept of
appropriation must overcome. Here the critique of the illusions of the
subject will be the necessary path to the sound appreciation of the concept
of appropriation. Appropriation will be the complement not only of the
distanciation of the text, but also of the relinquishment of the self.
   The conclusion will sketch the place of hermeneutic philosophy in relation
to the reflective Kantian tradition on the one hand, and the speculative
Hegelian tradition on the other. It will be shown why a hermeneutic philosophy must situate itself at an equal distance from both.

I.   Distanciation and appropriation
The dialectic of distanciation and appropriation is the final figure which
the dialectic of explanation and understanding must assume. It concerns
the way in which the text is addressed to someone.
  The potentialisation of the audience implies two ways of reconnecting
the discourse of the reader to that of the writer. These possibilities pertain
to the status of history in the whole process of interpretation. The general
tendency of literary and biblical criticism since the mid-nineteenth century
has been to link the contents of literary works, and in general of cultural
documents, to the social conditions of the community in which these
works were produced or to which they were directed. To explain a text
was essentially to consider it as the expression of certain socio-cultural

=== p. 146 ===

needs and as a response to certain perplexities localised in space and time.
In contrast to this trend, which was subsequently called ‘historicism’, an
alternative tendency arose, stemming from Frege and from the Husserl of
the Logical Investigations. According to these thinkers, meaning (they were
interested in the meaning of a proposition rather than that of a text) is not
an idea which someone has in mind; it is not a mental content but an ideal
object which can be identified and reidentified, by different individuals
in different periods, as being one and the same object. By ‘ideality’, they
understood that the meaning of a proposition is neither a physical nor
a mental reality. In Frege’s terms, Sinn is not Vorstellung, if Vorstellung
(idea, representation) is the mental event linked to the actualisation of
meaning by a given speaker in a given situation. The identity of ‘sense’ in
the infinite series of its mental actualisations constitutes the ideal dimension of the proposition. In a similar way, Husserl described the contents of
all intentional acts as the ‘noematic’ object, irreducible to the mental aspect
of the acts themselves. The notion of ideal ‘sense’, borrowed from Frege,
was thus extended by Husserl to all mental operations – not just logical
acts but also perceptual acts, volitional acts, affective acts, etc. For a
phenomenology ‘turned towards the object’, all intentional acts without
exception must be described in terms of their noematic side, understood as
the ‘correlate’ of the corresponding noetic acts.
   The inversion in the theory of propositional acts has an important
implication for hermeneutics, insofar as this discipline is conceived as
the theory of the fixation of life expressions by writing. After 1900, Dilthey
himself made a great effort to incorporate into his theory of meaning the
kind of ideality which he found in Husserl’s Logical Investigations. In
Dilthey’s later works, the interconnection (Zusammenhang) which gives a
text, a work of art or a document its power to be understood by another
and to be fixed by writing is somewhat similar to the ideality that Frege
and Husserl discerned at the basis of all propositions. If this comparison
holds, then the act of ‘understanding’ is less ‘historical’ and more ‘logical’
than the famous article of 1900 declares.2 The whole theory of the ‘human
sciences’ is affected by this important shift.
   A comparable change in the domain of literary criticism, in America and
on the Continent, can be related to the turn from history to logicity in the

2     W. Dilthey, ‘Origine et développement de l’herméneutique’ (1900) in Le Monde de l’Esprit i
      (Paris: Aubier, 1947) [English translation: ‘The development of hermeneutics’ in Selected
      Writings, edited and translated by H.P. Rickman (Cambridge: Cambridge University
      Press, 1976)].

=== p. 147 ===

explanation of cultural expressions. A wave of ‘anti-historicism’ followed
the earlier excesses of psychologism and sociologism. For this new attitude,
a text is not primarily a message addressed to a specific range of readers; in
this sense, it is not a segment of an historical chain. Insofar as it is a text, it is
a kind of atemporal object which has, as it were, broken its moorings with
all historical development. The rise to writing implies the ‘suspension’ of the
historical process, the transference of discourse to a sphere of ideality which
permits an indefinite expansion of the sphere of communication.
   I must say that I take this ‘anti-historicist’ trend into account and that
I accept its principal presupposition concerning the objectivity of meanings in general. It is because I concur with the project and the method of
this sort of literary criticism that I am ready to define, in new terms, the
dialectic between explanation and understanding which results from the
recognition of the specificity of the literary object.
   Let us develop this new dialectic: the objectification of meaning is a necessary mediation between the writer and the reader. But as mediation, it calls
for a complementary act of a more existential character which I shall call the
appropriation of meaning. ‘Appropriation’ is my translation of the German
term Aneignung. Aneignen means ‘to make one’s own’ what was initially
‘alien’. According to the intention of the word, the aim of all hermeneutics
is to struggle against cultural distance and historical alienation. Interpretation
brings together, equalises, renders contemporary and similar. This goal is
attained only insofar as interpretation actualises the meaning of the text for
the present reader. Appropriation is the concept which is suitable for the
actualisation of meaning as addressed to someone. It takes the place of the
answer in the dialogical situation, in the same way that ‘revelation’ or
‘disclosure’ takes the place of ostensive reference in the dialogical situation.
The interpretation is complete when the reading releases something like an
event, an event of discourse, an event in the present time. As appropriation,
the interpretation becomes an event. Appropriation is thus a dialectical
concept: the counterpart of the timeless distanciation implied by any literary
or textual criticism of an anti-historicist character.

II.    ‘Play’ as the mode of being of appropriation
The following theme was suggested by reading Gadamer;3 but it is also
called for by the theory of the heuristic fiction. I should like to show that it is

3     Hans-Georg Gadamer, Wahrheit und Methode (Tübingen: J.C.B. Mohr, 1960) [English
      translation: Truth and Method (London: Sheed and Ward, 1975)].

=== p. 148 ===

not only reality which is metamorphosed by the heuristic fiction, but also
the author and the reader. Thus the metamorphosis of the reading subject
results initially from the metamorphosis of the world, and then from the
metamorphosis of the author.

1. The heuristic fiction as play
Gadamer develops his conception of play in the course of a meditation on
the work of art. This meditation is wholly directed against the subjectivism
of the aesthetic consciousness which stems from the Kantian theory of the
‘judgement of taste’, itself linked to the theory of ‘reflecting judgement’.
Play is not determined by the consciousness which plays; play has its own
way of being. Play is an experience which transforms those who participate in it. It seems that the subject of aesthetic experience is not the player
himself, but rather what ‘takes place’ in play. In a similar way we speak of
the play of waves, of light, of parts of a machine and even of words. We
play with a project, with an idea; we can equally ‘be played’. What is
essential is the ‘to and fro’ (Hin und Her) of play. Play is thereby close to
dance, which is a movement that carries away the dancer. Thus we say
that the part ‘is played’, or again that something ‘is in play’ between . . . All
of these expressions betray that play is something other than the activity of
a subject. The to and fro of play occurs as if by itself, that is, without effort
or applied intention. This ‘in-itself’ of play is such that, even in solitary
play, there must be something with which or against which one plays
(with luck as one’s partner in times of success!). In this risk of an unknown
partner lies the ‘charm’ of play. Whoever plays is also played: the rules of
the game impose themselves upon the player, prescribing the to and fro
and delimiting the field where everything ‘is played’. Hence play shatters
the seriousness of a utilitarian preoccupation where the self-presence of
the subject is too secure. In play, subjectivity forgets itself; in seriousness,
subjectivity is regained.
   In what respects does this analysis, which we have briefly recalled,
clarify our problem of hermeneutic understanding? In the first place, the
presentation of a world in a work of art, and in general in a work of
discourse, is a playful presentation. Worlds are proposed in the mode of
play. The analysis of play thus enables us to recover in a new way the
dialectic between the suspension of didactic reference and the manifestation of another sort of reference, beyond the epoché of the former. Play
displays the same dialectic, developing a serious side of its own – what
Gadamer calls ‘presentation’ (Darstellung). In play, nothing is serious, but
something is presented, produced, given in representation. There is thus

=== p. 149 ===

an interesting relation between play and the presentation of a world. This
relation is, moreover, absolutely reciprocal: on the one hand, the presentation of the world in a poem is a heuristic fiction and in this sense ‘playful’;
but on the other hand, all play reveals something true, precisely because it
is play. To play, says Gadamer, is to play at something. In entering a game
we hand ourselves over, we abandon ourselves to the space of meaning
which holds sway over the reader.
   In play there occurs what Gadamer calls a ‘metamorphosis’ (Verwandlung), that is, both an imaginary transposition marked by the reign of
‘figures’ (Gebilde), and the transformation of everything into its true being.
Everyday reality is abolished and yet everyone becomes himself. Thus the
child who disguises himself as another expresses his profoundest truth.
The player is metamorphosed ‘in the true’; in playful representation, ‘what
is emerges’. But ‘what is’ is no longer what we call everyday reality; or
rather, reality truly becomes reality, that is, something which comprises
a future horizon of undecided possibilities, something to fear or to hope
for, something unsettled. Art only abolishes non-metamorphosed reality.
Whence the true mimesis: a metamorphosis according to the truth. In this
sense, we shall speak of recognition rather than cognition. In a theatrical
representation, we recognise characters and roles. Therein lies the paradox: the most imaginary creation elicits recognition. ‘As recognised, the
presented being is what is retained in its essence, what is detached from its
haphazard aspects’,4 stripped of all that is fortuitous and accidental. This
is the sense in which Aristotle could dare to say that poetry (he was
thinking of tragedy) is more philosophical than history. For poetry proceeds to the essential, whereas history remains content with the anecdotal.
Such is the significant link between fiction, figuration and recognition of
the essential.

2. The author as playful figure
A second implication emerges which is no less interesting than the first.
It is not only the presentation of the world which is ‘playful’, but also the
position of the author who ‘puts himself on stage’ and hence gives himself
in representation. Is this not the key to what we have called the potentia-lisation of the reader? Is he not also ‘metamorphosed’ by the play upon the
world which unfolds in the work of art? The hypothesis of a playful
relation between the author and his work is supported by diverse analyses

4   Ibid., p. 109 [p. 102].†

=== p. 150 ===

which come from quite a different perspective, in particular from German
and Anglo-Saxon literary criticism.5 The discussion in this critical literature was polarised, above all, by the problem of the relation between the
novelist and his characters. The term ‘point of view’ was used to describe
the various possible solutions contributed by novelists of the past to this
difficult problem: a total view of the characters by an omniscient author,
the identification with one of the characters through whose eyes the
author sees everything that is shown, the annihilation of the author in a
story which tells itself all alone, and so on.
   How can this debate be clarified by our earlier reflections on play? The
very fact that there have been numerous solutions to this technical problem results, in my opinion, from the playful character of the relation itself.
The author is rendered fictitious; and the different modalities of the relation of author to narration are like so many rules of this playful relation.
The solutions classified by Norman Friedman and F.K. Stanzel may be
reconsidered from this point of view.6 That these solutions constitute so
many fictions of the author seems to me confirmed by the remark of one of
the critics: ‘The author can, to a certain extent, choose to disguise himself,
but he can never choose to disappear.’7 To disguise oneself, to assume
different ‘voices’, is this not to play?
   For their part the French, more affected by the structuralist concern
to cut the links between the text and the author, emphasise the non-coincidence of the ‘psychological’ author and the ‘narrator’, where the
latter is ‘marked’ by the signs of the narrator in the text. But this non-coincidence cannot imply the elimination of the author; just as Benveniste
spoke of split reference with respect to poetic language, so too we must
introduce the idea of a ‘split speaker’. This splitting marks the irruption
of the playful relation into the very subjectivity of the author. We are
no longer very far from Dilthey when he speaks of ‘the position of the
poet’s imagination before the world of experiences’.8 In the same sense,
Wolfgang Kayser speaks of the ‘mythical creator’ in order to designate the
situation of the narrator. The narrator is the one who abstracts from his
personality so that a voice other than his is heard. Thus the very

5     See F. van Rossum-Guyon, ‘Point de vue ou perspective narrative’; Wolfgang Kayser, ‘Qui
      raconte le roman?’; and Wayne C. Booth, ‘Distance et point de vue’; all in Poétique, iv
      (1970). In France a related problem was posed by J. Pouillon in his work Temps et roman
      (Paris: Gallimard, 1946).
6     Cf. F. van Rossum-Guyon, ‘Point de vue ou perspective narrative’, pp. 481–2 and 485–90.
7     W.C. Booth, quoted in F. van Rossum-Guyon, ibid., p. 482.
8     W. Dilthey, quoted in F. van Rossum-Guyon, ibid., p. 486.

=== p. 151 ===

disappearance of the subject is still an imaginative variation of the
writer’s ego. The imaginative variation then consists in being part of the
narrative, in disguising oneself according to the narrative. In any case, it
is still a matter of a role assumed by the narrator. For the omniscient
narrator is just as much a fiction of the subject as the narrator identified
with a character or as the narrator dispersed among the characters who
appear to speak and to act all alone. The omniscient narrator is also an
‘autonomous figure created by the author in the same way as the characters’;9 even more so if the narrator is identified with a character or hidden
behind all. The objective and Olympian narrator may well disappear:
play is displaced towards the partial and restricted viewpoints of the
characters; or, as in The Sorrows of Young Werther, it is hidden in an
imaginary character inserted between the character and ourselves, such
that this third person is sensed to have put together the words of the poor
Werther, addressing us in the preface and engaging us in a pseudo-dialogue.
   It makes little difference, therefore, whether a text is written in third or
in first person. In every case, the distanciation is the same and the variety
of solutions proves that we have not gone beyond rule-governed play.
Thus the novelist may change his perspective and become suddenly
omniscient when he reads the thoughts of his characters. So while it is
true to say that the narrator is never the author, nevertheless the narrator
is always the one who is metamorphosed in a fictional character which is
the author. Even the death of the author is a game that the author plays.
In all cases he remains, according to Kayser’s expression, a ‘creator of
the universe’.10

3. The reader as playful figure
It is now possible to transfer the remarks on the author to the reader, and
to treat the reader in turn as a fictive or playful figure. For the author’s
subjectivity, submitted to imaginative variations, becomes a model offered
by the narrator to the subjectivity of his reader. The reader as well is
invited to undergo an imaginative variation of his ego. When the fictive
author of the preface of Werther addresses us, ‘and you, good soul . . .’, this
‘you’ is not the prosaic man who knows that Werther did not exist, but is
the ‘me’ who believes in fiction. As Kayser says, ‘the reader is a fictive

 9 F.K. Stanzel, quoted in F. van Rossum-Guyon, ibid., p. 490.
10 Wolfgang Kayser, ‘Qui raconte le roman?’, p. 510.

=== p. 152 ===

creation, a role which we can assume in order to look at ourselves’.11 In
this sense we may speak of metamorphosis, as Gadamer speaks of the
metamorphosis of reality in play. The reader is this imaginary ‘me’,
created by the poem and participating in the poetic universe.
  We may still speak of a relation of congeniality, but it is exercised from
the playful author to the playful reader. For the work itself has constructed
the reader in his role. So the congeniality does not signify anything other
than the double metamorphosis of the author and the reader: ‘Assuming
the role of reader corresponds to the mysterious metamorphosis which the
audience undergoes in the theatre when the lights go out and the curtains
are drawn.’12
  It is easy, therefore, to generalise beyond the novel or the story: even
when we read a philosophical work, it is always a question of entering into
an alien work, of divesting oneself of the earlier ‘me’ in order to receive,
as in play, the self conferred by the work itself.

III.   The illusions of the subject
The concept of appropriation has hardly been introduced when it becomes
the victim of errors linked to the primacy of the subject in modern
philosophy, insofar as the latter originates in the writings of Descartes,
Kant and Husserl. The role of the subject seems to imply that appropriation is a form of the constitution of objectivity in and by the subject.
This inference results in a series of errors about the very meaning of
appropriation. The first of these errors is a surreptitious return to the
Romantic pretension of recovering, by congenial coincidence, the genius
of the author: from genius to genius! Another error is to conceive of
appropriation in terms of the primacy of the original audience with
which one seeks to coincide: to discover to whom a text was addressed
and to identify oneself with that original audience, such would be the
task of hermeneutics. Or more bluntly, appropriation would consist in
subsuming interpretation to the finite capacities of understanding of the
present reader.
   This way of conceiving of appropriation, ensnared in these various errors,
is responsible for the distrust which scientific minds display towards hermeneutics, understood as a form of subjectivism or of subjectivist existentialism. Even Heidegger has been read this way: his ‘pre-understanding’

11 Ibid., p. 502.   12 Ibid., p. 510.

=== p. 153 ===

(Vorverständnis) is taken as indistinguishable from a simple projection of
the prejudices of the reader into his reading. The same could be said of
Bultmann’s hermeneutical circle: ‘to believe in order to understand’, is this
not to project the reading self into the text read?
   Here I shall say that the notion of subject must be submitted to a critique
parallel to that which the theory of metaphor exercises on the notion of
object. In fact, it is the same philosophical error which must be taken by
its two extremities: objectivity as confronting the subject, the subject as
reigning over objectivity.
   At this stage, everything gained from the critique of the illusions of the
subject must be integrated into hermeneutics. This critique, which I see
conducted in either a Freudian or a Marxist tradition, constitutes the
modern form of the critique of ‘prejudice’.
   According to the Marxist tradition, the critique of the subject is one aspect
of the general theory of ideology. Our understanding is based on prejudices
which are linked to our position in the relations of force of society, a position
which is partially unknown to us. Moreover, we are propelled to act by
hidden interests. Whence the falsification of reality. Thus the critique of
‘false consciousness’ becomes an integral part of hermeneutics. Here I see
the place for a necessary dialogue between hermeneutics and the theory of
ideology as developed, for instance, by Habermas.13
   According to the Freudian tradition, the critique of the subject is one
part of the critique of ‘illusions’. Here I am interested in psychoanalysis,
not as a grid for reading a text, but as the self-criticism of the reader, as the
purification of the act of appropriation. In Freud and Philosophy, I spoke of
an effect of self-analysis which I called the relinquishment of the subject.
As Freud said, the subject is not master in his own house. This critique is
addressed to what could be called the ‘narcissism of the reader’: to find
only oneself in a text, to impose and rediscover oneself.
   Relinquishment is a fundamental moment of appropriation and distinguishes it from any form of ‘taking possession’. Appropriation is also and
primarily a ‘letting-go’. Reading is an appropriation-divestiture. How can
this letting-go, this relinquishment, be incorporated into appropriation?
Essentially by linking appropriation to the revelatory power of the text
which we have described as its referential dimension. It is in allowing itself
to be carried off towards the reference of the text that the ego divests itself
of itself. [. . .]

13 See ‘Hermeneutics and the critique of ideology’, in this volume.

=== p. 154 ===

   The link between appropriation and revelation is, in my view, the
cornerstone of a hermeneutics which seeks both to overcome the failures
of historicism and to remain faithful to the original intention of Schleier-macher’s hermeneutics. To understand an author better than he understood himself is to unfold the revelatory power implicit in his discourse,
beyond the limited horizon of his own existential situation.
   On this basis, it is possible to refute fallacious views about the concept of
interpretation. In the first place, appropriation does not imply any direct
congeniality of one soul with another. Nothing is less inter-subjective or
dialogical than the encounter with a text; what Gadamer calls the ‘fusion
of horizons’ expresses the convergence of the world horizons of the writer
and the reader. The ideality of the text remains the mediator in this process
of the fusion of horizons.
   According to another fallacious view, the hermeneutical task would be
governed by the original audience’s understanding of the text. As Gada-mer has firmly demonstrated, this is a complete mistake: the Letters of
Saint Paul are no less addressed to me than to the Romans, the Galatians,
the Corinthians, etc. Only dialogue has a ‘you’, whose identification proceeds from the dialogue itself. If the meaning of a text is open to anyone
who can read, then it is the omni-temporality of meaning which opens it to
unknown readers; and the historicity of reading is the counterpart of this
specific omni-temporality. From the moment that the text escapes from its
author and from his situation, it also escapes from its original audience.
Hence it can procure new readers for itself.
   According to a third fallacious view, the appropriation of the meaning
of a text would subsume interpretation to the finite capacities of understanding of a present reader. The English and French translation of
Aneignung by ‘appropriation’ reinforces this suspicion. Do we not place
the meaning of the text under the domination of the subject who interprets? This objection can be dismissed by observing that what is ‘made our
own’ is not something mental, not the intention of another subject, nor
some design supposedly hidden behind the text; rather, it is the projection
of a world, the proposal of a mode of being-in-the-world, which the text
discloses in front of itself by means of its non-ostensive references. Far
from saying that a subject, who already masters his own being-in-theworld, projects the a priori of his own understanding and interpolates this
a priori in the text, I shall say that appropriation is the process by which
the revelation of new modes of being – or, if you prefer Wittgenstein
to Heidegger, new ‘forms of life’ – gives the subject new capacities for
knowing himself. If the reference of a text is the projection of a world, then

=== p. 155 ===

it is not in the first instance the reader who projects himself. The reader is
rather broadened in his capacity to project himself by receiving a new
mode of being from the text itself.
   Thus appropriation ceases to appear as a kind of possession, as a way of
taking hold of . . . It implies instead a moment of dispossession of the
narcissistic ego. This process of dispossession is the work of the sort of
universality and atemporality implied by the explanatory procedures.
Only the interpretation which satisfies the injunction of the text, which
follows the ‘arrow’ of meaning and endeavours to ‘think in accordance
with’ it, engenders a new self-understanding. By the expression ‘self-understanding’, I should like to contrast the self which emerges from the understanding of the text to the ego which claims to precede this understanding.
It is the text, with its universal power of unveiling, which gives a self to
the ego.
   It would require, at the end of this excursion, a long explanation in order
to situate hermeneutic philosophy in relation to the reflective Kantian
tradition on the one hand, and the speculative Hegelian tradition on the
other. We shall restrict ourselves here to offering a few remarks in support
of the thesis that hermeneutic philosophy must place itself at equal distance from both traditions, accepting as much from one tradition as from
the other but opposing each with equal force.
   By its concern to secure the link between understanding meaning and
self-understanding, hermeneutic philosophy is a continuation of reflective
philosophy. But the critique of the illusions of the subject and the permanent recourse to the great detour of signs distances it decisively from the
primacy of the cogito. Above all, the subordination of the theme of appropriation to that of manifestation turns more towards a hermeneutics of the
I am than a hermeneutics of the I think.14
   It may be thought that what distances hermeneutic philosophy from
reflective philosophy brings it nearer to speculative philosophy. That is
largely true. Thus Gadamer can say that his hermeneutics revives Hegel
insofar as it breaks with Schleiermacher. Fundamentally, the concept of
manifestation of a world, around which all other hermeneutical concepts
are organised, is closer to the idea of the ‘self-presentation’ (Selbstdarstellung) of the true, following the preface to The Phenomenology of Mind, than
to the Husserlian idea of constitution. But the permanent return of this

14 See Paul Ricoeur, ‘The question of the subject: the challenge of semiology’, translated by
   Kathleen McLaughlin, in The Conflict of Interpretations: Essays in Hermeneutics, edited by
   Don Ihde (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1974), pp. 236–66.

=== p. 156 ===

self-presentation to the event of speech in which, ultimately, interpretation
is accomplished signifies that philosophy mourns the loss of absolute
knowledge. It is because absolute knowledge is impossible that the conflict
of interpretations is insurmountable and inescapable.
   Between absolute knowledge and hermeneutics, it is necessary to choose.

