=== chunk: ricoeur-1981-hermeneutics-human-sciences/ch8-model-of-the-text ===
title: The model of the text: meaningful action considered as a text
source_pdf: docs/sources/ricoeur-1981-hermeneutics-human-sciences/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 210-234
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 159
plan_page_end: 183
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 159 ===

      The model of the text: meaningful
         action considered as a text

                                 B
My aim in this essay is to test an hypothesis which I shall expound briefly.
   I assume that the primary sense of the word ‘hermeneutics’ concerns
the rules required for the interpretation of the written documents of
our culture. In assuming this starting point I am remaining faithful to
the concept of Auslegung as it was stated by Wilhelm Dilthey; whereas
Verstehen (understanding, comprehension) relies on the recognition of
what a foreign subject means or intends on the basis of all kinds of signs
in which psychic life expresses itself (Lebensäusserungen), Auslegung (interpretation, exegesis) implies something more specific: it covers only a
limited category of signs, those which are fixed by writing, including all
the sorts of documents and monuments which entail a fixation similar
to writing.
   Now my hypothesis is this: if there are specific problems which are
raised by the interpretation of texts because they are texts and not spoken
language, and if these problems are the ones which constitute hermeneutics as such, then the human sciences may be said to be hermeneutical
(1) inasmuch as their object displays some of the features constitutive of a
text as text, and (2) inasmuch as their methodology develops the same kind
of procedures as those of Auslegung or text-interpretation.
   Hence the two questions to which my essay will be devoted are: (1) To
what extent may we consider the notion of text as a good paradigm for
the so-called object of the social sciences? (2) To what extent may we use
the methodology of text-interpretation as a paradigm for interpretation in
general in the field of the human sciences?

I.   The paradigm of text
In order to justify the distinction between spoken and written language,
I want to introduce a preliminary concept, that of discourse. It is as discourse that language is either spoken or written.

=== p. 160 ===

   Now what is discourse? We shall not seek the answer from the logicians,
not even from the exponents of linguistic analysis, but from the linguists
themselves. Discourse is the counterpart of what linguists call language-systems or linguistic codes. Discourse is language-event or linguistic
usage. [. . .]
   If the sign (phonological or lexical) is the basic unit of language, the
sentence is the basic unit of discourse. Therefore it is the linguistics of the
sentence which supports the theory of speech as an event. I shall retain
four traits from this linguistics of the sentence which will help me to
elaborate the hermeneutics of the event and of discourse.
   First trait: Discourse is always realised temporally and in the present,
whereas the language system is virtual and outside of time. Emile Benve-niste calls this the ‘instance of discourse’.
   Second trait: Whereas language lacks a subject – in the sense that the
question ‘Who is speaking?’ does not apply at its level – discourse refers
back to its speaker by means of a complex set of indicators such as the
personal pronouns. We shall say that the ‘instance of discourse’ is self-referential.
   Third trait: Whereas the signs in language only refer to other signs
within the same system, and whereas language therefore lacks a world
just as it lacks temporality and subjectivity, discourse is always about
something. It refers to a world which it claims to describe, to express, or to
represent. It is in discourse that the symbolic function of language is
actualised.
   Fourth trait: Whereas language is only the condition for communication
for which it provides the codes, it is in discourse that all messages are
exchanged. In this sense, discourse alone has not only a world, but an
other, another person, an interlocutor to whom it is addressed.
   These four traits taken together constitute speech as an event. [. . .] Let
us see how differently these four traits are actualised in spoken and
written language.

(1) Discourse, as we said, only exists as a temporal and present instance
of discourse. This first trait is realised differently in living speech and in
writing. In living speech, the instance of discourse has the character of a
fleeting event. The event appears and disappears. This is why there is a
problem of fixation, of inscription. What we want to fix is what disappears. If, by extension, we can say that one fixes language – inscription of
the alphabet, lexical inscription, syntactical inscription – it is for the sake of
that which alone has to be fixed, discourse. Only discourse is to be fixed,

=== p. 161 ===

because discourse disappears. The atemporal system neither appears nor
disappears; it does not happen. Here is the place to recall the myth in
Plato’s Phaedo. Writing was given to men to ‘come to the rescue’ of the
‘weakness of discourse’, a weakness which was that of the event. The gift
of the grammata – of that ‘external’ thing, of those ‘external marks’, of that
materialising alienation – was just that of a ‘remedy’ brought to our
memory. The Egyptian king of Thebes could well respond to the god
Theuth that writing was a false remedy in that it replaced true reminiscence by material conservation, and real wisdom by the semblance of
knowing. This inscription, in spite of its perils, is discourse’s destination.
What in effect does writing fix? Not the event of speaking, but the ‘said’ of
speaking, where we understand by the ‘said’ of speaking that intentional
exteriorisation constitutive of the aim of discourse thanks to which the
sagen – the saying – wants to become Aus-sage – the enunciation, the
enunciated. In short, what we write, what we inscribe, is the noema of
the speaking. It is the meaning of the speech event, not the event as event.
   What, in effect, does writing fix? If it is not the speech event, it is speech
itself insofar as it is said. But what is said?
   Here I should like to propose that hermeneutics has to appeal not only
to linguistics (linguistics of discourse versus linguistics of language) as it
does above, but also to the theory of the speech-act such as we find it in
Austin and Searle. The act of speaking, according to these authors, is
constituted by a hierarchy of subordinate acts which are distributed on
three levels: (1) the level of the locutionary or propositional act, the act of
saying; (2) the level of the illocutionary act or force, that which we do in
saying; and (3) the level of the perlocutionary act, that which we do by
saying. [. . .]
   What is the implication of these distinctions for our problem of the
intentional exteriorisation by which the event surpasses itself in the meaning and lends itself to material fixation? The locutionary act exteriorises
itself in the sentence. The sentence can in effect be identified and reiden-tified as being the same sentence. A sentence becomes an utterance
(Aus-sage) and thus is transferred to others as being such-and-such a
sentence with such-and-such a meaning. But the illocutionary act can also
be exteriorised through grammatical paradigms (indicative, imperative,
and subjunctive modes, and other procedures expressive of the illocutionary force) which permit its identification and reidentification. Certainly, in
spoken discourse, the illocutionary force leans upon mimicry and gestural
elements and upon the non-articulated aspects of discourse, what we call
prosody. In this sense, the illocutionary force is less completely inscribed

=== p. 162 ===

in grammar than is the propositional meaning. In every case, its inscription in a syntactic articulation is itself gathered up in specific paradigms
which in principle make possible fixation by writing. Without a doubt we
must concede that the perlocutionary act is the least inscribable aspect of
discourse and that by preference it characterises spoken language. But the
perlocutionary action is precisely what is the least discourse in discourse.
It is the discourse as stimulus. It acts, not by my interlocutor’s recognition
of my intention, but sort of energetically, by direct influence upon the
emotions and the affective dispositions. Thus the propositional act, the
illocutionary force, and the perlocutionary action are apt, in a decreasing
order, for the intentional exteriorisation which makes inscription in
writing possible.
   Therefore it is necessary to understand by the meaning of the speech-act,
or by the noema of the saying, not only the sentence, in the narrow sense of
the propositional act, but also the illocutionary force and even the perlocutionary action in the measure that these three aspects of the speech-act are
codified, gathered into paradigms, and where, consequently, they can be
identified and reidentified as having the same meaning. Therefore I am
here giving the word ‘meaning’ a very large acceptation which covers all
the aspects and levels of the intentional exteriorisation that makes the
inscription of discourse possible.
   The destiny of the other three traits of discourse in passing from discourse to writing will permit us to make more precise the meaning of this
elevation of saying to what is said.

(2) In discourse, we said – and this was the second differential trait of
discourse in relation to language – the sentence designates its speaker by
diverse indicators of subjectivity and personality. In spoken discourse, this
reference by discourse to the speaking subject presents a character of
immediacy that we can explain in the following way. The subjective
intention of the speaking subject and the meaning of the discourse overlap
each other in such a way that it is the same thing to understand what
the speaker means and what his discourse means. The ambiguity of the
French expression vouloir-dire, the German meinen, and the English ‘to
mean’, attests to this overlapping. It is almost the same thing to ask ‘What
do you mean?’ and ‘What does that mean?’ With written discourse, the
author’s intention and the meaning of the text cease to coincide. This
dissociation of the verbal meaning of the text and the mental intention is
what is really at stake in the inscription of discourse. Not that we can
conceive of a text without an author; the tie between the speaker and the

=== p. 163 ===

discourse is not abolished, but distended and complicated. The dissociation of the meaning and the intention is still an adventure of the reference
of discourse to the speaking subject. But the text’s career escapes the finite
horizon lived by its author. What the text says now matters more than
what the author meant to say, and every exegesis unfolds its procedures
within the circumference of a meaning that has broken its moorings to the
psychology of its author. Using Plato’s expression again, written discourse
cannot be ‘rescued’ by all the processes by which spoken discourse supports itself in order to be understood – intonation, delivery, mimicry,
gestures. In this sense, the inscription in ‘external marks’ which first
appeared to alienate discourse, marks the actual spirituality of discourse.
Henceforth, only the meaning ‘rescues’ the meaning, without the contribution of the physical and psychological presence of the author. But to
say that the meaning rescues the meaning is to say that only interpretation
is the ‘remedy’ for the weakness of discourse which its author can no
longer ‘save’.

(3) The event is surpassed by the meaning a third time. Discourse, we
said, is what refers to the world, to a world. In spoken discourse this
means that what the dialogue ultimately refers to is the situation common
to the interlocutors. This situation in a way surrounds the dialogue, and its
landmarks can all be shown by a gesture, or by pointing a finger, or
designated in an ostensive manner by the discourse itself through the
oblique reference of those other indicators which are the demonstratives,
the adverbs of time and place, and the tense of the verb. In oral discourse,
we are saying, reference is ostensive. What happens to it in written discourse? Are we saying that the text no longer has a reference? This would
be to confound reference and monstration, world and situation. Discourse
cannot fail to be about something. In saying this, I am separating myself
from any ideology of an absolute text. Only a few sophisticated texts
satisfy this ideal of a text without reference. They are texts where the play
of the signifier breaks away from the signified. But this new form is only
valuable as an exception and cannot give the key to all other texts which in
one manner or another speak about the world. But what then is the subject
of texts when nothing can be shown? Far from saying that the text is then
without a world, I shall now say without paradox that only man has a
world and not just a situation. In the same manner that the text frees its
meaning from the tutelage of the mental intention, it frees its reference
from the limits of ostensive reference. For us, the world is the ensemble
of references opened up by the texts. Thus we speak about the ‘world’ of

=== p. 164 ===

Greece, not to designate any more what were the situations for those who
lived them, but to designate the non-situational references which outlive
the effacement of the first and which henceforth are offered as possible
modes of being, as symbolic dimensions of our being-in-the-world. For me,
this is the referent of all literature; no longer the Umwelt of the ostensive
references of dialogue, but the Welt projected by the non-ostensive references of every text that we have read, understood, and loved. To understand a text is at the same time to light up our own situation, or, if you will,
to interpolate among the predicates of our situation all the significations
which make a Welt of our Umwelt. It is this enlarging of the Umwelt into the
Welt which permits us to speak of the references opened up by the text – it
would be better to say that the references open up the world. Here again the
spirituality of discourse manifests itself through writing, which frees us
from the visibility and limitation of situations by opening up a world for
us, that is, new dimensions of our being-in-the-world.
   In this sense, Heidegger rightly says – in his analysis of verstehen in Being
and Time – that what we understand first in a discourse is not another
person, but a project, that is, the outline of a new being-in-the-world. Only
writing, in freeing itself, not only from its author, but from the narrowness
of the dialogical situation, reveals this destination of discourse as projecting a world.
   In thus tying reference to the projection of a world, it is not only
Heidegger whom we rediscover, but Wilhelm von Humboldt for whom
the great justification of language is to establish the relation of man to the
world. If you suppress this referential function, only an absurd game of
errant signifiers remains.

(4) But it is perhaps with the fourth trait that the accomplishment of
discourse in writing is most exemplary. Only discourse, not language, is
addressed to someone. This is the foundation of communication. But it is
one thing for discourse to be addressed to an interlocutor equally present
to the discourse situation, and another to be addressed, as is the case in
virtually every piece of writing, to whoever knows how to read. The
narrowness of the dialogical relation explodes. Instead of being addressed
just to you, the second person, what is written is addressed to the audience
that it creates itself. This, again, marks the spirituality of writing, the
counterpart of its materiality and of the alienation which it imposes upon
discourse. The vis-à-vis of the written is just whoever knows how to read.
The co-presence of subjects in dialogue ceases to be the model for every
‘understanding’. The relation writing–reading ceases to be a particular

=== p. 165 ===

case of the relation speaking–hearing. But at the same time, discourse is
revealed as discourse in the universality of its address. In escaping the
momentary character of the event, the bounds lived by the author, and the
narrowness of ostensive reference, discourse escapes the limits of being
face to face. It no longer has a visible auditor. An unknown, invisible
reader has become the unprivileged addressee of the discourse.
   To what extent may we say that the object of the human sciences
conforms to the paradigm of the text? Max Weber defines this object as
sinnhaft orientiertes Verhalten, as meaningfully oriented behaviour. To what
extent may we replace the predicate ‘meaningfully oriented’ by what
I should like to call readability-characters derived from the preceding theory
of the text?
   Let us try to apply our four criteria of what a text is to the concept of
meaningful action.

1. The fixation of action
Meaningful action is an object for science only under the condition of a
kind of objectification which is equivalent to the fixation of a discourse by
writing. This trait presupposes a simple way to help us at this stage of our
analysis. In the same way that interlocution is overcome in writing, interaction is overcome in numerous situations in which we treat action as a
fixed text. These situations are overlooked in a theory of action for which
the discourse of action is itself a part of the situation of transaction which
flows from one agent to another, exactly as spoken language is caught in
the process of interlocution, or, if we may use the term, of translocution.
This is why the understanding of action at the prescientific level is only
‘knowledge without observation’, or as E. Anscombe says, ‘practical
knowledge’ in the sense of ‘knowing how’ as opposed to ‘knowing that’.
But this understanding is not yet an interpretation in the strong sense which
deserves to be called scientific interpretation.
  My claim is that action itself, action as meaningful, may become an
object of science, without losing its character of meaningfulness, through a
kind of objectification similar to the fixation which occurs in writing. By
this objectification, action is no longer a transaction to which the discourse
of action would still belong. It constitutes a delineated pattern which has
to be interpreted according to its inner connections.
  This objectification is made possible by some inner traits of the action which
are similar to the structure of the speech-act and which make doing a kind of
utterance. In the same way as the fixation by writing is made possible by a
dialectic of intentional exteriorisation immanent to the speech-act itself,

=== p. 166 ===

a similar dialectic within the process of transaction prepares the detachment
of the meaning of the action from the event of the action.
   First an action has the structure of a locutionary act. It has a propositional
content which can be identified and reidentified as the same. This ‘propositional’ structure of the action has been clearly and demonstratively
expounded by Anthony Kenny in Action, Emotion and Will.1 The verbs of
action constitute a specific class of predicates which are similar to relations
and which, like relations, are irreducible to all the kinds of predicates
which may follow the copula ‘is’. The class of action predicates, in its turn,
is irreducible to the relations and constitutes a specific set of predicates.
Among other traits, the verbs of action allow a plurality of ‘arguments’
capable of complementing the verb, ranging from no argument (Plato
taught) to an indeterminate number of arguments (Brutus killed Caesar
in the Curia, on the Ides of March, with a . . ., with the help of . . .). This
variable polydicity of the predicative structure of the action-sentences is
typical of the propositional structure of action. Another trait which is
important for the transposition of the concept of fixation from the sphere
of discourse to the sphere of action concerns the ontological status of the
‘complements’ of the verbs of action. Whereas relations hold between
terms equally existing (or non-existing), certain verbs of action have a
topical subject which is identified as existing and to which the sentence
refers, and complements which do not exist. Such is the case with the
‘mental acts’ (to believe, to think, to will, to imagine, etc.).
   Anthony Kenny describes some other traits of the propositional structure of actions derived from the description of the functioning of the verbs
of action. For example, the distinction between states, activities, and
performances can be stated according to the behaviour of the tenses of
the verbs of action which fix some specific temporal traits of the action
itself. The distinction between the formal and the material object of an
action (let us say the difference between the notion of all inflammable
things and this letter which I am now burning) belongs to the logic of
action as mirrored in the grammar of the verbs of action. Such, roughly
described, is the propositional content of action which gives a basis to a
dialectic of event and meaning similar to that of the speech-act. I should like
to speak here of the noematic structure of action. It is this noematic
structure which may be fixed and detached from the process of interaction
and become an object to interpret.

1     Anthony Kenny, Action, Emotion and Will (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1963).

=== p. 167 ===

   Moreover, this noema has not only a propositional content, but also
presents ‘illocutionary’ traits very similar to those of the complete speech-act. The different classes of performative acts of discourse described by
Austin at the end of How to do Things with Words may be taken as paradigms
not only for the speech-acts themselves, but for the actions which fulfil the
corresponding speech-acts.2 A typology of action, following the model of
illocutionary acts, is therefore possible. Not only a typology, but a criteriol-ogy, inasmuch as each type implies rules, more precisely ‘constitutive rules’
which, according to Searle in Speech Acts, allow the construction of ‘ideal
models’ similar to the ‘ideal types’ of Max Weber.3 For example, to understand what a promise is, we have to understand what the ‘essential condition’
is according to which a given action ‘counts as’ a promise. Searle’s ‘essential
condition’ is not far from what Husserl called Sinngehalt, which covers both
the ‘matter’ (propositional content) and the ‘quality’ (the illocutionary force).
   We may now say that an action, like a speech-act, may be identified not
only according to its propositional content, but also according to its
illocutionary force. Both constitute its ‘sense-content’. Like the speech-act, the action-event (if we may coin this analogical expression) develops
a similar dialectic between its temporal status as an appearing and disappearing event, and its logical status as having such-and-such identifiable
meaning or ‘sense-content’. But if the ‘sense-content’ is what makes possible the ‘inscription’ of the action-event, what makes it real? In other
words, what corresponds to writing in the field of action?
   Let us return to the paradigm of the speech-act. What is fixed by
writing, we said, is the noema of the speaking, the saying as said. To what
extent may we say that what is done is inscribed? Certain metaphors may
be helpful at this point. We say that such-and-such event left its mark on its
time. We speak of marking events. Are not there ‘marks’ on time, the kind
of thing which calls for a reading, rather than for a hearing? But what is
meant by this metaphor of the printed mark?
   The three other criteria of the text will help us to make the nature of this
fixation more precise.

2. The autonomisation of action
In the same way that a text is detached from its author, an action is
detached from its agent and develops consequences of its own. This

2   J.L. Austin, How to do Things with Words (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1962).
3   John R. Searle, Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language (Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press, 1969), p. 56.

=== p. 168 ===

autonomisation of human action constitutes the social dimension of action.
An action is a social phenomenon not only because it is done by several
agents in such a way that the role of each of them cannot be distinguished
from the role of the others, but also because our deeds escape us and have
effects which we did not intend. One of the meanings of the notion of
‘inscription’ appears here. The kind of distance which we found between
the intention of the speaker and the verbal meaning of a text occurs also
between the agent and its action. It is this distance which makes the
ascription of responsibility a specific problem. We do not ask, who smiled?
who raised his hand? The doer is present to his doing in the same way as
the speaker is present to his speech. With simple actions like those which
require no previous action in order to be done, the meaning (noema) and
the intention (noesis) coincide or overlap. With complex actions some
segments are so remote from the initial simple segments, which can be
said to express the intention of the doer, that the ascription of these actions
or action-segments constitutes a problem as difficult to solve as that of
authorship in some cases of literary criticism. The assignation of an author
becomes a mediate inference well known to the historian who tries to
isolate the role of an historical character in the course of events.
   We just used the expression ‘the course of events’. Could we not say that
what we call the course of events plays the role of the material thing which
‘rescues’ the vanishing discourse when it is written? As we said in a
metaphorical way, some actions are events which imprint their mark on
their time. But on what did they imprint their mark? Is it not in something
spatial that discourse is inscribed? How could an event be printed on
something temporal? Social time, however, is not only something which
flees; it is also the place of durable effects, of persisting patterns. An action
leaves a ‘trace’, it makes its ‘mark’ when it contributes to the emergence of
such patterns which become the documents of human action.
   Another metaphor may help us to delineate this phenomenon of the
social ‘imprint’: the metaphor of the ‘record’ or of the ‘registration’. Joel
Feinberg, in Reason and Responsibility, introduces this metaphor in another
context, that of responsibility, in order to show how an action may be
submitted to blame. Only actions, he says, which can be ‘registered’ for
further notice, placed as an entry on somebody’s ‘record’, can be blamed.4
And when there are no formal records (such as those which are kept by
institutions like employment offices, schools, banks, and the police), there

4     Joel Feinberg, Reason and Responsibility (Belmont, Calif.: Dickenson, 1965).

=== p. 169 ===

is still an informal analogue of these formal records which we call reputation and which constitutes a basis for blaming. I should like to apply this
interesting metaphor of a record and reputation to something other than
the quasi-judicial situations of blaming, charging, crediting, or punishing.
Could we not say that history is itself the record of human action?
History is this quasi-‘thing’ on which human action leaves a ‘trace’, puts
its mark. Hence the possibility of ‘archives’. Before the archives which
are intentionally written down by the memorialists, there is this continuous process of ‘recording’ human action which is history itself as the sum
of ‘marks’, the fate of which escapes the control of individual actors.
Henceforth history may appear as an autonomous entity, as a play with
players who do not know the plot. This hypostasis of history may be
denounced as a fallacy, but this fallacy is well entrenched in the process
by which human action becomes social action when written down in the
archives of history. Thanks to this sedimentation in social time, human
deeds become ‘institutions’, in the sense that their meaning no longer
coincides with the logical intentions of the actors. The meaning may be
‘depsychologised’ to the point where the meaning resides in the work
itself. In the words of P. Winch, in The Idea of a Social Science, the object of
the social sciences is a ‘rule-governed behaviour’.5 But this rule is not
superimposed; it is the meaning as articulated from within these sedimented or instituted works.
   Such is the kind of ‘objectivity’ which proceeds from the ‘social fixation’
of meaningful behaviour.

3. Relevance and importance
According to our third criterion of what a text is, we could say that
a meaningful action is an action the importance of which goes ‘beyond’
its relevance to its initial situation. This new trait is very similar to the
way in which a text breaks the ties of discourse to all the ostensive
references. As a result of this emancipation from the situational context,
discourse can develop non-ostensive references which we called a
‘world’, in the sense in which we speak of the Greek ‘world’, not in
the cosmological sense of the word, but as an ontological dimension.
What would correspond in the field of action to the non-ostensive
references of a text?

5   Peter Winch, The Idea of a Social Science and its Relation to Philosophy (London: Routledge
    and Kegan Paul, 1958).

=== p. 170 ===

   We opposed, in introducing the present analysis, the importance of an
action to its relevance as regards the situation to which it wanted to respond.
An important action, we could say, develops meanings which can be
actualised or fulfilled in situations other than the one in which this action
occurred. To say the same thing in different words, the meaning of an
important event exceeds, overcomes, transcends, the social conditions of its
production and may be re-enacted in new social contexts. Its importance is
its durable relevance and, in some cases, its omni-temporal relevance.
   This third trait has important implications as regards the relation
between cultural phenomena and their social conditions. Is it not a fundamental trait of the great works of culture to overcome the conditions of
their social production, in the same way as a text develops new references
and constitutes new ‘worlds’? It is in this sense that Hegel spoke, in The
Philosophy of Right, of the institutions (in the largest sense of the word)
which ‘actualise’ freedom as a second nature in accordance with freedom.
This ‘realm of actual freedom’ is constituted by the deeds and works
capable of receiving relevance in new historical situations. If this is true,
this way of overcoming one’s own conditions of production is the key to
the puzzling problem raised by Marxism concerning the status of the
‘superstructures’. The autonomy of superstructures as regards their relation to their own infrastructures has its paradigm in the non-ostensive
references of a text. A work does not only mirror its time, but it opens up a
world which it bears within itself.

4. Human action as an ‘open work’
Finally, according to our fourth criterion of the text as text, the meaning of
human action is also something which is addressed to an indefinite range of
possible ‘readers’. The judges are not the contemporaries, but, as Hegel
said, history itself. Weltgeschichte ist Weltgericht. That means that, like a
text, human action is an open work, the meaning of which is ‘in suspense’.
It is because it ‘opens up’ new references and receives fresh relevance from
them, that human deeds are also waiting for fresh interpretations which
decide their meaning. All significant events and deeds are, in this way,
opened to this kind of practical interpretation through present praxis.
Human action, too, is opened to anybody who can read. In the same
way that the meaning of an event is the sense of its forthcoming interpretations, the interpretation by the contemporaries has no particular
privilege in this process.
   This dialectic between the work and its interpretations will be the topic
of the methodology of interpretation that we shall now consider.

=== p. 171 ===

II.   The paradigm of text-interpretation
I want now to show the fruitfulness of this analogy of the text at the level
of methodology.
   The main implication of our paradigm, as concerns the methods of the
social sciences, is that it offers a fresh approach to the question of the
relation between erklären (explanation) and verstehen (understanding,
comprehension) in the human sciences. As is well known, Dilthey gave
this relation the meaning of a dichotomy. For him, any model of explanation is borrowed from a different region of knowledge, that of the
natural sciences with their inductive logic. Thereafter, the autonomy of
the so-called Geisteswissenschaften is preserved only by recognising the
irreducible factor of understanding a foreign psychic life on the basis of
the signs in which this life is immediately exteriorised. But if verstehen is
separated from erklären by this logical gap, how can the human sciences
be scientific at all? Dilthey kept wrestling with this paradox. He discovered more and more clearly, mainly after having read Husserl’s
Logical Investigations, that the Geisteswissenschaften are sciences inasmuch
as the expressions of life undergo a kind of objectification which makes
possible a scientific approach somewhat similar to that of the natural
sciences, in spite of the logical gap between Natur and Geist, factual
knowledge and knowledge by signs. In this way the mediation offered
by these objectifications appeared to be more important, for a scientific
purpose, than the immediate meaningfulness of the expressions of life for
everyday transactions.
   My own interrogation starts from this last perplexity in Dilthey’s
thought. And my hypothesis is that the kind of objectification implied in
the status of discourse as text provides a better answer to the problem
raised by Dilthey. This answer relies on the dialectical character of the
relation between erklären and verstehen as it is displayed in reading. Our
task therefore will be to show to what extent the paradigm of reading,
which is the counterpart of the paradigm of writing, provides a solution
for the methodological paradox of the human sciences.
   The dialectic involved in reading expresses the originality of the relation between writing and reading and its irreducibility to the dialogical
situation based on the immediate reciprocity between speaking and hearing. There is a dialectic between explaining and comprehending because
the writing–reading situation develops a problematic of its own which
is not merely an extension of the speaking–hearing situation constitutive
of dialogue.

=== p. 172 ===

   It is here, therefore, that our hermeneutics is most critical as regards
the Romantic tradition in hermeneutics which took the dialogical situation as the standard for the hermeneutical operation applied to the text.
My contention is that it is this operation, on the contrary, which reveals
the meaning of what is already hermeneutical in dialogical understanding. So if the dialogical relation does not provide us with the paradigm
of reading, we have to build it as an original paradigm, as a paradigm of
its own.
   This paradigm draws its main features from the status of the text itself
as characterised by (1) the fixation of the meaning, (2) its dissociation
from the mental intention of the author, (3) the display of non-ostensive
references, and (4) the universal range of its addressees. These four traits
taken together constitute the ‘objectivity’ of the text. From this ‘objectivity’ derives a possibility of explaining which is not derived in any way
from another field, that of natural events, but which is congenial to this
kind of objectivity. Therefore there is no transfer from one region of
reality to another – let us say, from the sphere of facts to the sphere of
signs. It is within the same sphere of signs that the process of objectification takes place and gives rise to explanatory procedures. And it is
within the same sphere of signs that explanation and comprehension
are confronted.
   I propose that we consider this dialectic in two different ways: (1) as
proceeding from comprehension to explanation, and (2) as proceeding
from explanation to comprehension. The exchange and the reciprocity
between both procedures will provide us with a good approximation of
the dialectical character of the relation. At the end of each half of this
demonstration I shall try to indicate briefly the possible extension of the
paradigm of reading to the whole sphere of the human sciences.

1. From understanding to explanation
This first dialectic – or rather this first figure of a unique dialectic – may be
conveniently introduced by our contention that to understand a text is not
to rejoin the author. The disjunction of the meaning and the intention
creates an absolutely original situation which engenders the dialectic of
erklären and verstehen. If the objective meaning is something other than the
subjective intention of the author, it may be construed in various ways.
The problem of the right understanding can no longer be solved by a
simple return to the alleged intention of the author.
   This construction necessarily takes the form of a process. As Hirsch says
in his book Validity in Interpretation, there are no rules for making good

=== p. 173 ===

guesses. But there are methods for validating guesses.6 This dialectic
between guessing and validating constitutes one figure of our dialectic
between comprehension and explanation.
   In this dialectic both terms are decisive. Guessing corresponds to what
Schleiermacher called the ‘divinatory’, validation to what he called the
‘grammatical’. My contribution to the theory of this dialectic will be to link
it more tightly to the theory of the text and text-reading.
   Why do we need an art of guessing? Why do we have to ‘construe’ the
meaning? Not only – as I tried to say a few years ago – because language is
metaphorical and because the double meaning of metaphorical language
requires an art of deciphering which tends to unfold the several layers of
meaning. The case of the metaphor is only a particular case for a general
theory of hermeneutics. In more general terms, a text has to be construed
because it is not a mere sequence of sentences, all on an equal footing
and separately understandable. A text is a whole, a totality. The relation
between whole and parts – as in a work of art or in an animal – requires a
specific kind of ‘judgement’ for which Kant gave the theory in the third
Critique. Correctly, the whole appears as a hierarchy of topics, or primary
and subordinate topics. The reconstruction of the text as a whole necessarily has a circular character, in the sense that the presupposition of a certain
kind of whole is implied in the recognition of the parts. And reciprocally,
it is in construing the details that we construe the whole. There is no
necessity and no evidence concerning what is important and what is
unimportant, what is essential and what is unessential. The judgement
of importance is a guess.
   To put the difficulty in other terms, if a text is a whole, it is once more an
individual like an animal or a work of art. As an individual it can only be
reached by a process of narrowing the scope of generic concepts concerning the literary genre, the class of text to which this text belongs, the
structures of different kinds which intersect in this text. The localisation
and the individualisation of this unique text is still a guess.
   Still another way of expressing the same enigma is that as an individual
the text may be reached from different sides. Like a cube, or a volume
in space, the text presents a ‘relief’. Its different topics are not at the

6   Eric D. Hirsch, Jr, Validity in Interpretation (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1967), p. 25:
    ‘The act of understanding is at first a genial (or a mistaken) guess and there are no
    methods for making guesses, no rules for generating insights; the methodological activity
    of interpretation commences when we begin to test and criticize our guesses’; and further:
    ‘A mute symbolism may be construed in several ways.’

=== p. 174 ===

same altitude. Therefore the reconstruction of the whole has a perspecti-vist aspect similar to that of perception. It is always possible to relate the
same sentence in different ways to this or that sentence considered as
the cornerstone of the text. A specific kind of onesidedness is implied
in the act of reading. This onesidedness confirms the guess character of
interpretation.
   For all these reasons there is a problem of interpretation not so much
because of the incommunicability of the psychic experience of the author,
but because of the very nature of the verbal intention of the text. This
intention is something other than the sum of the individual meanings of
the individual sentences. A text is more than a linear succession of sentences. It is a cumulative, holistic process. This specific structure of the text
cannot be derived from that of the sentence. Therefore the kind of plurivo-city which belongs to texts as texts is something other than the polysemy
of individual words in ordinary language and the ambiguity of individual
sentences. This plurivocity is typical of the text considered as a whole, open
to several readings and to several constructions.
   As concerns the procedures of validation by which we test our guesses,
I agree with Hirsch that they are closer to a logic of probability than to a
logic of empirical verification. To show that an interpretation is more probable in the light of what is known is something other than showing that a
conclusion is true. In this sense, validation is not verification. Validation is
an argumentative discipline comparable to the juridical procedures of legal
interpretation. It is a logic of uncertainty and of qualitative probability.
In this sense we may give an acceptable sense to the opposition between
Geisteswissenschaften and Naturwissenschaften without conceding anything to
the alleged dogma of the ineffability of the individual. The method of
conveyance of indices, typical of the logic of subjective probability, gives a
firm basis for a science of the individual deserving the name of science.
A text is a quasi-individual, and the validation of an interpretation applied
to it may be said, with complete legitimacy, to give a scientific knowledge
of the text.
   Such is the balance between the genius of guessing and the scientific
character of validation which constitutes the modern complement of the
dialectic between verstehen and erklären.
   At the same time, we are prepared to give an acceptable meaning to the
famous concept of a hermeneutical circle. Guess and validation are in a
sense circularly related as subjective and objective approaches to the text.
But this circle is not a vicious circularity. It would be a cage if we were
unable to escape the kind of ‘self-confirmability’ which, according to

=== p. 175 ===

Hirsch,7 threatens this relation between guess and validation. To the
procedures of validation also belong procedures of invalidation similar
to the criteria of falsifiability emphasised by Karl Popper in his Logic
of Scientific Discovery.8 The role of falsification is played here by the
conflict between competing interpretations. An interpretation must not
only be probable, but more probable than another. There are criteria of
relative superiority which may easily be derived from the logic of subjective probability.
   In conclusion, if it is true that there is always more than one way of
construing a text, it is not true that all interpretations are equal and may
be assimilated to so-called ‘rules of thumb’. The text is a limited field
of possible constructions. The logic of validation allows us to move
between the two limits of dogmatism and scepticism. It is always possible to argue for or against an interpretation, to confront interpretations,
to arbitrate between them, and to seek for an agreement, even if this
agreement remains beyond our reach.
   To what extent is this dialectic between guessing and validating paradigmatic for the whole field of the human sciences?
   That the meaning of human actions, of historical events, and of social
phenomena may be construed in several different ways is well known by
all experts in the human sciences. What is less known and understood is
that this methodological perplexity is founded in the nature of the object
itself and, moreover, that it does not condemn the scientist to oscillate
between dogmatism and scepticism. As the logic of text-interpretation
suggests, there is a specific plurivocity belonging to the meaning of human
action. Human action, too, is a limited field of possible constructions.
   A trait of human action which has not yet been emphasised in the
preceding analysis may provide an interesting link between the specific
plurivocity of the text and the analogical plurivocity of human action. This
trait concerns the relation between the purposive and the motivational
dimensions of action. As many philosophers in the new field of action
theory have shown, the purposive character of an action is fully recog-nised when the answer to the question ‘what’ is explained in terms of an
answer to the question ‘why’. I understand what you intended to do, if you
are able to explain to me why you did such-and-such an action. Now, what
kinds of answer to the question ‘why’ make sense? Only those answers
which afford a motive understood as a reason for . . . and not as a cause.

7   Ibid., pp. 164ff.
8   Karl Popper, The Logic of Scientific Discovery (New York: Basic Books, 1959).

=== p. 176 ===

And what is a reason for . . . which is not a cause? It is, in the terms of
E. Anscombe and A.I. Melden, an expression, or a phrase, which allows us
to consider the action as this or that.9 If you tell me that you did this or that
because of jealousy or in a spirit of revenge, you are asking me to put your
action in the light of this category of feelings or dispositions. By the same
token, you claim to make sense of your action. You claim to make it
understandable for others and for yourself. This attempt is particularly
helpful when applied to what Anscombe calls the ‘desirability-character’
of wanting. Wants and beliefs have the character not only of being forces
which make people act in such-and-such ways, but of making sense as a
result of the apparent good which is the correlate of their desirability-character. I may have to answer the question, as what do you want this?
On the basis of these desirability-characters and the apparent good which
corresponds to them, it is possible to argue about the meaning of an action,
to argue for or against this or that interpretation. In this way the account of
motives already foreshadows a logic of argumentation procedures. Could
we not say that what can be (and must be) construed in human action is
the motivational basis of this action, i.e., the set of desirability-characters
which may explain it? And could we not say that the process of arguing
linked to the explanation of action by its motives unfolds a kind of
plurivocity which makes action similar to a text?
   What seems to legitimate this extension from guessing the meaning of a
text to guessing the meaning of an action is that in arguing about the
meaning of an action I put my wants and my beliefs at a distance and
submit them to a concrete dialectic of confrontation with opposite points
of view. This way of putting my action at a distance in order to make sense
of my own motives paves the way for the kind of distanciation which
occurs with what we called the social inscription of human action and to
which we applied the metaphor of the ‘record’. The same actions which
may be put into ‘records’ and henceforth ‘recorded’ may also be explained
in different ways according to the multivocity of the arguments applied to
their motivational background.
   If we are correct in extending to action the concept of ‘guess’ which we
took as a synonym for verstehen, we may also extend to the field of action
the concept of ‘validation’ in which we saw an equivalent of erklären. Here,
too, the modern theory of action provides us with an intermediary link
between the procedures of literary criticism and those of the social sciences.

9     G.E.M. Anscombe, Intention (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1972); A.I. Melden, Free Action
      (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1961).

=== p. 177 ===

Some thinkers have tried to elucidate the way in which we impute actions
to agents in the light of the juridical procedures by which a judge or a
tribunal validates a decision concerning a contract or a crime. In a famous
article, ‘The ascription of responsibility and rights’, H.L.A. Hart shows in a
very convincing way that juridical reasoning does not at all consist in
applying general laws to particular cases, but each time in construing
uniquely referring decisions.10 These decisions terminate a careful refutation of the excuses and defences which could ‘defeat’ the claim or the
accusation. In saying that human actions are fundamentally ‘defeasible’
and that juridical reasoning is an argumentative process which comes to
grips with the different ways of ‘defeating’ a claim or an accusation, Hart
has paved the way for a general theory of validation in which juridical
reasoning would be the fundamental link between validation in literary
criticism and validation in the social sciences. The intermediary function of
juridical reasoning clearly shows that the procedures of validation have a
polemical character. In front of the court, the plurivocity common to texts
and to actions is exhibited in the form of a conflict of interpretations, and
the final interpretation appears as a verdict to which it is possible to make
appeal. Like legal utterances, all interpretations in the field of literary
criticism and in the social sciences may be challenged, and the question
‘what can defeat a claim’ is common to all argumentative situations. Only
in the tribunal is there a moment when the procedures of appeal are
exhausted. But it is because the decision of the judge is implemented by
the force of public power. Neither in literary criticism, nor in the social
sciences, is there such a last word. Or, if there is any, we call that violence.

2. From explanation to understanding
The same dialectic between comprehension and explanation may receive
a new meaning if taken in the reverse way, from explanation to understanding. This new Gestalt of the dialectic proceeds from the nature of
the referential function of the text. This referential function, as we said,
exceeds the mere ostensive designation of the situation common to both
speaker and hearer in the dialogical situation. This abstraction from the
surrounding world gives rise to two opposite attitudes. As readers, we
may either remain in a kind of state of suspense as regards any kind of
referred-to world, or we may actualise the potential non-ostensive references of the text in a new situation, that of the reader. In the first case, we

10 H.L.A. Hart, ‘The ascription of responsibility and rights’, Proceedings of the Aristotelian
   Society, 49 (1948), pp. 171–94.

=== p. 178 ===

treat the text as a worldless entity; in the second, we create a new ostensive
reference through the kind of ‘execution’ which the art of reading implies.
These two possibilities are equally entailed by the act of reading, conceived as their dialectical interplay.
   The first way of reading is exemplified today by the different structural
schools of literary criticism. Their approach is not only possible, but
legitimate. It proceeds from the suspension, the epoché, of the ostensive
reference. To read, in this way, means to prolong this suspension of the
ostensive reference to the world and to transfer oneself into the ‘place’
where the text stands, within the ‘enclosure’ of this worldless place.
According to this choice, the text no longer has an outside, it has only an
inside. Once more, the very constitution of the text as text and of the
system of texts as literature justifies this conversion of the literary thing
into a closed system of signs, analogous to the kind of closed system which
phonology discovered at the root of all discourse, and which de Saussure
called la langue. Literature, according to this working hypothesis, becomes
an analogon of la langue.
   On the basis of this abstraction, a new kind of explanatory attitude may
be extended to the literary object, which, contrary to the expectation of
Dilthey, is no longer borrowed from the natural sciences, i.e., from an area
of knowledge alien to language itself. The opposition between Natur and
Geist is no longer operative here. If some model is borrowed, it comes from
the same field, from the semiological field. It is henceforth possible to treat
texts according to the elementary rules which linguistics successfully
applied to the elementary systems of signs that underlie the use of language. We have learned from the Geneva school, the Prague school, and
the Danish school, that it is always possible to abstract systems from
processes and to relate these systems – whether phonological, lexical, or
syntactical – to units which are merely defined by their opposition to other
units of the same system. This interplay of merely distinctive entities
within finite sets of such units defines the notion of structure in linguistics.
   It is this structural model which is now applied to texts, i.e., to sequences
of signs longer than the sentence, which is the last kind of unit that
linguistics takes into account. In his Structural Anthropology, Claude Lévi-Strauss formulates this working hypothesis in regard to one category of
texts, that of myths.11

11 Claude Lévi-Strauss, Anthropologie structurale (Paris: Plon, 1958) [English translation:
   Structural Anthropology, translated by Claire Jacobson and Brooke Grundfest Schoepf
   (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1968)].

=== p. 179 ===

   By means of this working hypothesis, the large units which are at least
the same size as the sentence and which, put together, form the narrative
proper of the myth, will be able to be treated according to the same rules as
the smallest units known to linguistics. [. . . In this way,] we can indeed say
that we have explained a myth, but not that we have interpreted it. We can,
by means of structural analysis, bring out the logic of it, the operations
which relate the ‘bundles of relations’ among themselves. This logic constitutes ‘the structural law of the myth under consideration’.12 This law is preeminently an object of reading and not at all of speaking, in the sense of
a recitation where the power of the myth would be re-enacted in a particular situation. Here the text is only a text, thanks to the suspension of its
meaning for us, to the postponement of all actualisation by present speech.
   I want now to show in what way ‘explanation’ (erklären) requires
‘understanding’ (verstehen) and brings forth in a new way the inner dialectic which constitutes ‘interpretation’ as a whole.
   As a matter of fact, nobody stops with a conception of myths and of
narratives as formal as this algebra of constitutive units. This can be
shown in different ways. First, even in the most formalised presentation
of myths by Lévi-Strauss, the units which he calls ‘mythemes’ are still
expressed as sentences which bear meaning and reference. Can anyone
say that their meaning as such is neutralised when they enter into the
‘bundle of relations’ which alone is taken into account by the ‘logic’ of
the myth? Even this bundle of relations, in its turn, must be written in the
form of a sentence. Finally, the kind of language-game which the whole
system of oppositions and combinations embodies, would lack any kind
of significance if the oppositions themselves, which, according to Lévi-Strauss, the myth tends to mediate, were not meaningful oppositions
concerning birth and death, blindness and lucidity, sexuality and truth.
Beside these existential conflicts there would be no contradictions to
overcome, no logical function of the myth as an attempt to solve these
contradictions. Structural analysis does not exclude, but presupposes, the
opposite hypothesis concerning the myth, i.e., that it has a meaning as
a narrative of origins. Structural analysis merely represses this function.
But it cannot suppress it. The myth would not even function as a logical
operator if the propositions which it combines did not point toward
boundary situations. Structural analysis, far from getting rid of this radical
questioning, restores it at a level of higher radicality.

12 Ibid., p. 241 [p. 217].†

=== p. 180 ===

   If this is true, could we not say that the function of structural analysis is
to lead from a surface semantics, that of the narrated myth, to a depth
semantics, that of the boundary situations which constitute the ultimate
‘referent’ of the myth?
   I really believe that if such were not the function of structural analysis, it
would be reduced to a sterile game, a divisive algebra, and even the myth
would be bereaved of the function which Lévi-Strauss himself assigns to it,
that of making men aware of certain oppositions and of tending toward
their progressive mediation. To eliminate this reference to the aporias of
existence around which mythic thought gravitates would be to reduce the
theory of myth to the necrology of the meaningless discourses of mankind.
If, on the contrary, we consider structural analysis as a stage – and a
necessary one – between a naive interpretation and a critical interpretation,
between a surface interpretation and a depth interpretation, then it would
be possible to locate explanation and understanding at two different stages
of a unique hermeneutical arc. It is this depth semantics which constitutes
the genuine object of understanding and which requires a specific affinity
between the reader and the kind of things the text is about.
   But we must not be misled by this notion of personal affinity. The depth
semantics of the text is not what the author intended to say, but what the
text is about, i.e., the non-ostensive reference of the text. And the non-ostensive reference of the text is the kind of world opened up by the depth
semantics of the text. Therefore what we want to understand is not
something hidden behind the text, but something disclosed in front of it.
What has to be understood is not the initial situation of discourse, but
what points toward a possible world. Understanding has less than ever to
do with the author and his situation. It wants to grasp the proposed
worlds opened up by the references of the text. To understand a text is
to follow its movement from sense to reference, from what it says, to what
it talks about. In this process the mediating role played by structural
analysis constitutes both the justification of this objective approach and
the rectification of the subjective approach. We are definitely prevented
from identifying understanding with some kind of intuitive grasping of
the intention underlying the text. What we have said about the depth
semantics which structural analysis yields invites us rather to think of the
sense of the text as an injunction starting from the text, as a new way of
looking at things, as an injunction to think in a certain manner. [. . .]
   This second figure or Gestalt of the dialectic between explanation and
comprehension has a strong paradigmatic character which holds for the
whole field of the human sciences. I want to emphasise three points.

=== p. 181 ===

   First, the structural model, taken as a paradigm for explanation, may be
extended beyond textual entities to all social phenomena because it is not
limited in its application to linguistic signs, but applies to all kinds of
signs which are analogous to linguistic signs. The intermediary link
between the model of the text and social phenomena is constituted by
the notion of semiological systems. A linguistic system, from the point of
view of semiology, is only a species within the semiotic genre, although
this species has the privilege of being a paradigm for the other species of
the genre. We can say therefore that a structural model of explanation can
be generalised as far as all social phenomena which may be said to have a
semiological character, i.e., as far as it is possible to define the typical
relations of a semiological system at their level: the general relation
between code and message, relations among the specific units of the code,
the relation between signifier and signified, the typical relation within
and among social messages, the structure of communication as an
exchange of messages, etc. Inasmuch as the semiological model holds,
the semiotic or symbolic function, i.e., the function of substituting signs
for things and of representing things by the means of signs, appears to be
more than a mere effect in social life. It is its very foundation. We should
have to say, according to this generalised function of the semiotic, not
only that the symbolic function is social, but that social reality is fundamentally symbolic.
   If we follow this suggestion, then the kind of explanation which is
implied by the structural model appears to be quite different from the
classical causal model, especially if causation is interpreted in Humean
terms as a regular sequence of antecedents and consequents with no inner
logical connection between them. Structural systems imply relations of
a quite different kind, correlative rather than sequential or consecutive.
If this is true, the classical debate about motives and causes which has
plagued the theory of action these last decades loses its importance. If the
search for correlations within semiotic systems is the main task of explanation, then we have to reformulate the problem of motivation in social
groups in new terms. But it is not the aim of this essay to develop this
implication.
   Secondly, the second paradigmatic factor in our previous concept of
text-interpretation proceeds from the role which we assigned to depth
semantics between structural analysis and appropriation. This mediating
function of depth semantics must not be overlooked, since the appropri-ation’s losing its psychological and subjective character and receiving a
genuine epistemological function depends on it.

=== p. 182 ===

   Is there something similar to the depth semantics of a text in social
phenomena? I should tend to say that the search for correlations within
and between social phenomena treated as semiotic entities would lose
importance and interest if it did not yield something like a depth semantics.
In the same way as language-games are forms of life, according to the
famous aphorism of Wittgenstein, social structures are also attempts to
cope with existential perplexities, human predicaments and deep-rooted
conflicts. In this sense, these structures, too, have a referential dimension.
They point toward the aporias of social existence, the same aporias around
which mythical thought gravitates. And this analogical function of
reference develops traits very similar to what we called the non-ostensive
reference of a text, i.e., the display of a Welt which is no longer an Umwelt,
the projection of a world which is more than a situation. May we not say
that in social science, too, we proceed from naive interpretations to critical
interpretations, from surface interpretations to depth interpretations
through structural analysis? But it is depth interpretation which gives
meaning to the whole process.
   This last remark leads us to our third and last point. If we follow the
paradigm of the dialectic between explanation and understanding to its
end, we must say that the meaningful patterns which a depth interpretation wants to grasp cannot be understood without a kind of personal
commitment similar to that of the reader who grasps the depth semantics
of the text and makes it his ‘own’. Everybody knows the objection which
an extension of the concept of appropriation to the social sciences is
exposed to. Does it not legitimate the intrusion of personal prejudices,
of subjective bias into the field of scientific inquiry? Does it not introduce
all the paradoxes of the hermeneutical circle into the human sciences?
In other words, does not the paradigm of disclosure plus appropriation
destroy the very concept of a human science? The way in which we
introduced this pair of terms within the framework of text-interpretation
provides us not only with a paradigmatic problem, but with a paradigmatic solution. This solution is not to deny the role of personal commitment in understanding human phenomena, but to qualify it.
   As the model of text-interpretation shows, understanding has nothing
to do with an immediate grasping of a foreign psychic life or with an
emotional identification with a mental intention. Understanding is entirely
mediated by the whole of explanatory procedures which precede it and
accompany it. The counterpart of this personal appropriation is not
something which can be felt, it is the dynamic meaning released by the

=== p. 183 ===

explanation which we identified earlier with the reference of the text, i.e.,
its power of disclosing a world.
   The paradigmatic character of text-interpretation must be applied down
to this ultimate implication. This means that the conditions of an authentic
appropriation, as they were displayed in relation to texts, are themselves
paradigmatic. Therefore we are not allowed to exclude the final act of
personal commitment from the whole of objective and explanatory procedures which mediate it.
   This qualification of the notion of personal commitment does not eliminate the ‘hermeneutical circle’. This circle remains an insuperable structure of knowledge when it is applied to human things, but this
qualification prevents it from becoming a vicious circle.
   Ultimately, the correlation between explanation and understanding,
between understanding and explanation, is the ‘hermeneutical circle’.

