=== chunk: wittgenstein-1998-culture-and-value/period-1937-1941 ===
title: Remarks 1937–1941 — middle period
source_pdf: docs/sources/wittgenstein-1998-culture-and-value/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 45-70
page_scheme: pdf
plan_page_start: 45
plan_page_end: 70
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 45 ===

the task should not remain unfinished disguises itself as a prediction that it will be
taken further by the next generation. MS 147 16r: 1934

The overwhelming skill in Brahms. MS 147 22r: 1934

If I say: "that is the only thing that is really seen" I point in front of me. If I were
to point sideways or behind me however--at things that I did not see--this pointing
would lose all its sense for me. That means, though that my pointing in front of me
is not contrasted with anything.

(Someone who is in a hurry will when sitting in a car push involuntarily, even
though he may tell himself that he is not pushing the car at all.) MS 157a 2r: 1934*

By the way, in my artistic activities I have merely good manners. MS 157a 22v:

In the days of silent films all the classics were played with the films, except
Brahms & Wagner.

Not Brahms because he is too abstract. I can imagine an exciting scene in a film
accompanied with music by Beethoven or Schubert & might gain some sort of
understanding of the music from the film. But not an understanding of music by
Brahms. Bruckner on the other hand does go with a film. MS 157a 44v: 1934 or

The queer resemblance between a philosophical investigation (perhaps especially
in mathematics <)> and one in aesthetics. (E.g. what is bad about this garment,
how it should be, etc..) MS 116 56: 1937

The edifice of your pride has to be dismantled. And that means frightful work.
MS 157a 57r: 1937

In one day you can experience the horrors of hell; that is plenty of time. MS 157a
57r: 1937

=== p. 46 ===

There is a big difference between the effect of a script that you can read fluently
& one that you can write but not decipher†a easily. The thoughts are
enclosed,†16 as in a casket. MS 157a 58r: 1937

The greater "purity" of objects that do not affect the senses, numbers for instance.
MS 157a 62v: 1937

If you offer a sacrifice & then are conceited about it, you will be cursed along
with your†b sacrifice. MS 157a 66v c: 1937

The light shed by work is a beautiful light, but it only shines with real beauty if it is
illuminated by yet another light. MS 157a 67v c: 1937

"Yes, that's how it is," you say, "because that's how it must be!"

(Schopenhauer: the real life span of the human being is 100 years.)
"Of course, it must be like that!" It is as though you have understood a creator's
purpose. You have understood the system.

You do not ask yourself 'How long do human beings actually live then?', that
seems now a superficial matter; whereas you have understood something more
profound. MS 157b 9v: 1937

The†17 only way namely for us†c to avoid prejudice†18 --or vacuity in our
claims, is to posit†d the ideal as what it is, namely as an object of comparison--a
measuring rod as it were--within our way of looking at things, & not†e as a
preconception to which everything must†f conform. This namely is†g the
dogmatism into which philosophy†h can so easily degenerate.

=== p. 47 ===

But then†19 what is the relation between an approach like Spengler's & mine?

Injustice in Spengler: The ideal loses none of its dignity if it is posited as the
principle determining the form of one's approach. A good unit of measurement.---†20 MS 157b 15v: 1937

Slept a bit better. Vivid dreams. A bit depressed; weather & state of health.

The solution of the problem you see in life is a way of living which makes what is
problematic disappear.

The fact that life is problematic means that your life does not fit life's shape. So
you must change your life, & once it fits the shape, what is problematic will
disappear.

But don't we have the feeling that someone who doesn't see a problem there is
blind to something important, indeed to what is most important of all?

Wouldn't I like to say he is living aimlessly--just blindly like a mole as it were; & if
he could only see†a, he would see the problem?

Or shouldn't I say: someone who lives rightly does not experience the problem as
sorrow, hence not after all as a problem, but rather as joy, that is so to speak as a
bright halo round his life, not a murky background. MS 118 17r c: 27.8.1937*

Almost in the same way as earlier physicists are said to have found suddenly that
they had too little mathematical understanding to be able to master physics; we
may say that young people today are suddenly in the position that ordinary
common sense no longer suffices to meet the strange demands life makes.
Everything has become so intricate that for its mastery†b an exceptional degree of
understanding is required. For it is not enough any longer to be able to play the
game well; but the question is again and again: what sort of game is to be played
now anyway?†c MS 118 20r: 27.8.1937

There is much that is excellent in Macaulay's essays; only his value judgements on
people are tiresome, & superfluous. One would like to say to him: stop
gesticulating! & just say what you have to say. MS 118 21v: 27.8.1937

=== p. 48 ===

Ideas too sometimes fall from the tree before they are ripe. MS 118 35r c:

In philosophizing it is important for me to keep changing my position, not to stand
too long on one leg, so as not to get stiff.

Like someone on a long up-hill climb who walks backwards for a while to revive
himself, stretch some different muscles. MS 118 45r c: 1.9.1937

Caught a bit of a chill & unable to think. Ghastly weather.--

Christianity is not a doctrine, not, I mean, a theory about what has happened &
will happen to the human soul, but a description of something that actually takes
place in human life. For 'recognition of sin' is an actual occurrence & so is despair
& so is redemption through faith. Those who speak of it (like Bunyan), are simply
describing what has happened to them; whatever gloss someone may want to put
on it! MS 118 56r c: 4.9.1937*

When I imagine a piece of music, something I do every day & often, I--always I
think--rhythmically grind my upper & lower front teeth together. I have noticed it
before but usually it takes place quite unconsciously. Moreover it's as though the
notes in my imagination were produced by this movement.

I think this way of hearing music in the imagination may be very common. I can of
course also imagine music without moving my teeth, but then the notes are much
more blurred, much less clear, less pronounced. MS 118 71v c: 9.9.1937

If certain graphic propositions for instance are laid down for human beings as
dogmas governing thinking, namely in such a way that opinions are not thereby
determined, but the expression of opinions†a is completely controlled, this will
have a very strange effect. People will live under an absolute, palpable tyranny,
yet without being able to say they are not free.†i I think the Catholic Church does
something like this. For dogma is expressed in the form of an assertion & is
unshakable, & at the same time any practical

opinion can be made to accord with it; admittedly this is easier in some cases,

=== p. 49 ===

more difficult in others. It is not a wall setting limits to belief, but like a brake
which in practice however serves the same purpose;†a†b almost as though
someone attached a weight to your foot to limit your freedom of movement.†c
This is how dogma becomes irrefutable & beyond the reach of attack. MS 118

With thinking too there is a time for ploughing & a time for harvesting.

It gives me satisfaction to write a lot every day. This is childish but that's how it is.
MS 118 87r c: 11.9.1937*

If I am thinking just for myself without wanting to write a book, I jump about all
round the topic; that is the only way of thinking that is natural to me. Forcing my
thoughts into an ordered sequence is a torment for me. Should I even attempt it
now??

I squander untold effort making an arrangement of my thoughts that may have no
value whatever. MS 118 94v c: 15.9.1937

People have sometimes said to me†d they cannot make any judgement about this
or that because they have never learnt philosophy. This is irritating nonsense,†e it
is†f being assumed that philosophy is some sort of science. And people speak of it
as they might speak of medicine.--What one can say, however, is that people who
have never carried out an investigation of a philosophical sort, like most
mathematicians for instance, are not equipped with the right optical instruments
for that sort of investigation or scrutiny. Almost,†g as someone who is not used to
searching in the forest for berries†h will not find any because his eye has not been
sharpened for such things & he does not know where you have to be particularly
on the lookout for them. Similarly someone unpractised in philosophy passes by all
the spots where difficulties lie hidden under the grass, while someone with
practice pauses & senses that there is a difficulty here, even though†i he does not
yet

see it.--And no wonder, if one knows how long even the practised investigator,
who realizes there is a difficulty, has to search in order to find it.

If something is well hidden it is hard to find. MS 118 113r: 24.9.1937

=== p. 50 ===

Religious similes can be said to move on the edge of the abyss. B<unyan>'s
allegory for instance. For what if we simply add: "and all these traps, swamps,
wrong turnings, were planted by the Lord of the Road, the monsters, thieves,
robbers were created by him?"

Without doubt, that is not the sense of the simile! but this sequel is too obvious!
For many & for me it robs the simile of its power.

But more especially if this is--as it were--suppressed. It would be different if it
were said openly at every turn: 'I am using this as a simile, but look: it doesn't fit
here'. Then you wouldn't feel you were being cheated, that someone were trying to
convince you by trickery. You can say to someone for instance: "Thank God for
the good you receive but don't complain about the evil,†a as you would of course
do if a human being were to do you good and evil by turns." Rules of life are
dressed up in pictures. And these pictures can only serve to describe what we are
supposed to do, but not to justify it. Because to be a justification they would have
to hold good in other respects too. I can say: "Thank these bees for their honey as
though they†i were good people who have prepared it for you"; that is intelligible
& describes how I wish you to behave. But not: <">. Thank them, for look how
good they are!"--since the next moment they may sting you.

Religion says: Do this!--Think like that! but it cannot justify this and it only need
try to do so to become repugnant; since for every reason it gives, there is a cogent
counter-reason.

It is more convincing to say: "Think like this!--however strange it may seem.--"
Or: "Won't you do this?--repugnant as it is.--"

Election by grace: It is only permissible to write like this out of the most frightful
suffering--& then it means something quite different. But for this reason it is not
permissible for anyone to cite it as truth, unless he himself says it in torment.--It
simply isn't a theory.--Or as one might also say: if this is truth, it is not the truth it
appears at first glance to express. It's less

a theory than a sigh, or a cry. MS 118 117v: 24.9.1937

In the course of our conversations Russell would often exclaim: "Logic's
hell!"--And this fully expresses what we†a experienced while†b thinking about

=== p. 51 ===

the problems of logic; namely their immense difficulty. Their hardness--their hard
& slippery texture.

The primary ground of this experience, I think, was this fact: that each new†c
phenomenon of language that we might retrospectively think of†d could show our
earlier explanation to be unworkable.†e†f But that is the difficulty Socrates gets
caught up in when he tries to give the definition of a concept. Again and again an
application of the word emerges that seems not to be compatible with the concept
to which other applications have led us. We say: but that isn't how it is!--it is like
that though!--& all we can do is keep repeating these antitheses. MS 119 59:

The spring that flows quietly & clearly†g in the Gospels seems to foam in Paul's
Epistles. Or that is how it seems to me. Perhaps it is just my own impurity that
reads muddiness into it; for why shouldn't this impurity be able to pollute what is
clear? But for me it's as though I saw human passion, something like pride or
anger, which does not square with the humility of the Gospels. It is as though he
really is insisting here on his own person, & doing so moreover as a religious act,
something which is foreign to the Gospel. I want to ask--& may this be no
blasphemy--: "What would Christ perhaps have said to Paul?"

But a fair rejoinder to that would be: What business is that of yours? Look after
making yourself more decent! In your present state, you are quite incapable of
understanding what may be the truth here.

In the Gospels--as it seems to me--everything is less pretentious, humbler, simpler.
There you find huts;--with Paul a church. There all human beings are equal & God
himself is a human being; with Paul there is already something like a hierarchy;
honours, and official positions.--That is, as it were, what my NOSE tells me. MS

Let us be human.--

I just took some apples out of a paper bag where they had been lying for a long
time; I had to cut off & throw away half of many of them. Afterwards as I was
copying out a sentence of mine the second half of which was bad, I at once saw it
as a half-rotten apple. And that's how it always is with me. Everything that comes
my way becomes for me†a a picture of what I am thinking about. (Is there

=== p. 52 ===

something feminine about this outlook?) MS 119 83: 7.10.1937

Doing this work I am†b in the same state as that of many people when they
struggle in vain†c to recall a name; we say in such a case: "think of something
else, then it will come to you"--& similarly I had constantly to think of something
else†i so that what I had long been searching for could occur†d to me. MS 119

The origin & the primitive form of the language game is a reaction; only from this
can the more complicated forms grow.

Language--I want to say--is a refinement, 'in the beginning was the deed'†ii. MS

Kierkegaard writes: If Christianity were so easy and cosy, why would God have
moved Heaven & Earth in his Scripture, threatened eternal punishments--.
--Question: But why is this Scripture so unclear then? If we want to warn someone
of a terrible danger, do we do it by giving him a riddle to solve, whose solution is
perhaps the warning?--But who is to say that the Scripture really is unclear: isn't it
possible that it was essential in this case to tell a riddle? That a more direct
warning, on the other hand, would necessarily have had the wrong effect? God has
four people recount the life of the incarnate God, each one differently, &
contradicting each other--but can't we say: It is important that this narrative
should not have more than quite middling historical plausibility, just so that
this†21 should not be taken as the essential, decisive thing. So that the letter
should not be believed more strongly than is proper & the spirit should receive its
due. I.e.: What you are supposed to see cannot be communicated even by the

best, most accurate, historian; therefore a mediocre account suffices, is even to be
preferred. For that too can tell you what you are supposed to be told. (Roughly in
the way a mediocre stage set can be better than a sophisticated one, painted trees
better than real ones,--which distract attention from what matters.)

The Spirit puts what is essential, essential for your life, into these words. The point
is precisely that you are SUPPOSED to see clearly only what even this
representation clearly shows. (I am not sure how far all this is exactly in the spirit
of Kierkegaard.) MS 119 151: 22.10.1937

=== p. 53 ===

In religion it must be the case that corresponding to every level of devoutness
there is a form of expression that has no sense at a lower level. For those still at
the lower level this doctrine, which means something at the higher level, is null &
void; it can only be understood wrongly, & so these words are not valid for such a
person.

Paul's doctrine of election by grace for instance is at my level irreligiousness, ugly
non-sense. So it is not meant for me since I can only apply wrongly the picture
offered me. If it is a holy & good picture, then it is so for a quite different level,
where it must be applied in life quite differently than I could apply it. MS 120 8:

Christianity is not based on a historical truth, but presents us with a (historical)
narrative & says: now believe! But not believe this report with the belief that†22
is appropriate to a historical report,--but rather: believe, through thick & thin &
you can do this only as the outcome of a life. Here you have a message!--don't
treat it as you would another historical message! Make a quite different place for
it in your life.--There is no paradox about that!

If I realized how mean & petty I am, I should become more modest.

Nobody can say with truth of himself that he is filth. For if I do say it, though it
can be true in a sense, still I cannot myself be penetrated by this truth: otherwise I
should have to go mad, or change myself.

Had coffee with A.R.†23; it was not as it used to be, but it was not bad either.

Queer as it sounds: the historical accounts of the Gospels might, in the historical
sense, be demonstrably false, & yet belief would lose nothing through this: but not
because it has to do with 'universal truths of reason'!

rather, because historical proof (the historical proof-game) is irrelevant to belief.
This message (the Gospels) is seized on by a human being believingly (i.e.
lovingly): That is the certainty of this "taking-for-true", nothing else.

The believer's relation to these messages is neither a relation to historical truth
(probability) nor yet that to a doctrine consisting of 'truths of reason'. There is
such a thing.--(We have quite different attitudes even to different species of what
we call fiction!) MS 120 83 c: 8-9.12.1937*

=== p. 54 ===

You cannot write more truly about yourself than you are. That is the difference
between writing about yourself and writing about external things. You write about
yourself from your own height. Here you don't stand on stilts or on a ladder but on
your bare feet. MS 120 103 c: 12.12.1937

A great blessing for me to be able to work today. But I so easily forget all my
blessings!

I am reading: "& no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost."†i
And it is true: I cannot call him Lord; because that says absolutely nothing to me. I
could call him "the paragon", "God" even or rather: I can understand it when he is
so called; but I cannot utter the word "Lord" meaningfully. Because I do not
believe that he will come to judge me; because that says nothing to me. And it
could only say something to me if I were to live quite differently.

What inclines even me to believe in Christ's resurrection? I play as it were with
the thought.--If he did not rise from the dead, then he decomposed in the grave
like every human being. He is dead & decomposed. In that case he is a teacher,
like any other & can no longer help; & we are once more orphaned & alone. And
have to make do with wisdom & speculation. It is as though we are in a hell,
where we can only†a dream & are shut out from heaven, roofed in as it were. But
if I am to be REALLY redeemed,--I need certainty--not wisdom, dreams,
speculation--and this certainty is faith. And faith is faith in what my heart, my
soul, needs, not my speculative intellect. For my soul, with its passions, as it were
with its flesh & blood, must be redeemed, not my abstract mind. Perhaps one may

say: Only love can believe the Resurrection. Or: it is love that believes the
Resurrection. One might say: redeeming love believes even in the Resurrection;
holds fast even to the Resurrection. What fights doubt is as it were redemption.
Holding fast to it must be holding fast to this belief. So this means: first be
redeemed & hold on tightly to your redemption (keep hold of your
redemption)--then you will see that what you are holding on to is this belief. So
this can only come about if you no longer support yourself on this†a earth but
suspend yourself from heaven. Then everything is different and it is 'no wonder' if
you can then do what now you cannot do. (It is true that someone who is
suspended looks like someone who is standing but the interplay of forces within
him is nevertheless a quite different one & hence he is able to do quite different
things than can one who stands.) MS 120 108 c: 12.12.1937*

=== p. 55 ===

Freud's idea: in madness the lock is not destroyed, only altered; the old key can no
longer open it, but a differently configured key could do so. MS 120 113: 2.1.1938

A Bruckner symphony can be said to have two beginnings: the beginning of the
first idea & the beginning of the second idea. These two ideas stand to each other
not as blood relations, but†b as man & wife.

Bruckner's Ninth is a sort of protest against Beethoven's, & because of this†c
becomes bearable, which as a sort of imitation it would not be. It stands to
Beethoven's Ninth very much as Lenau's Faust to Goethe's, which means as the
Catholic to the Enlightenment Faust. etc. etc. MS 120 142: 19.2.1938

Nothing is so difficult as not deceiving yourself. MS 120 283: 7.4.1938

Longfellow:
            In the elder days of art,

            Builders wrought with greatest care

            Each minute & unseen part,

            For the gods are†i everywhere.

            (This might serve as my motto.)

MS 120 289: 20.4.1938

Phenomena akin to language in music or architecture. Significant irregularity--in
Gothic e.g. (I have in mind too the towers of St. Basil's Cathedral.) Bach's music is
more like language than Mozart's & Haydn's. The double bass recitative in the 4th
movement of Beethoven's 9th Symphony. (Compare too Schopenhauer's remark
about universal music composed to a particular text.)†24 MS 121 26v: 25.5.1938

=== p. 56 ===

In philosophy the winner of the race is the one who can run most slowly. Or: the
one who gets to the winning post last.†a†b MS 121 35v: 11.6.1938

Being psychoanalyzed is in a way like eating from the tree of knowledge.†c The
knowledge we acquire sets us (new) ethical problems; but contributes nothing to
their solution. MS 122 129: 30.12.1939

What is lacking in Mendelssohn's music? A 'courageous' melody? MS 162a 18:
1939-1940

The Old Testament seen as the body without its head; the New T.: the head; the
Epistles of the Apostles: the crown on the head.

If I think of the Jewish Bible, the Old Testament on its own, I should like to say:
the head is (still) missing from this body The solution to these problems is missing
The fulfilment of these hopes is missing. But I do not necessarily think of a head
as having a crown. MS 162b 16v: 1939-1940

Envy is something superficial--i.e.: the typical colour of envy does not go down
deep--farther down passion has a different colouring. (That does not, of course,
make envy any less real.) MS 162 21v: 1939-1940

The measure of genius is character,--even if character on its own does not amount
to genius

Genius is not 'talent and character', but character manifesting itself in the form of
a special talent. Where one man will show courage by jumping into the water,
another will show courage by writing a symphony. (This is a weak example.) MS
162b 22r c: 1939-1940

There is no more light in a genius than in any other honest human being--but the
genius concentrates this light into a burning point by means of a particular kind of

=== p. 57 ===

lens.

Why is the soul moved by idle thoughts,--since they are after all idle? Well, it is
moved by them.

(How can the wind move a tree, since it is after all just wind†a ? Well, it does
move it; & don't forget it.) MS 162b 24r: 1939-1940

One cannot speak the truth;--if one has not yet conquered oneself. One cannot
speak it--but not, because one is still not clever enough.

The truth can be spoken only by someone who is already at home in it; not by
someone who still lives in untruthfulness, & does no more than reach out towards
it from within untruthfulness. MS 162b 37r c: 1939-1940

Resting on your laurels is as dangerous as resting when hiking through snow. You
doze off & die in your sleep. MS 162b 42v c: 1939-1940

The monstrous vanity of wishes is revealed for instance in†b my wish to fill a nice
notebook with writing as soon as possible. I get nothing from this; it's not that I
wish it because, say, it will be evidence of my productivity; it is simply a longing
to rid myself of something familiar as soon as I can; although of course, as soon as
I am rid of it, I must start a fresh one & the whole business will have to be
repeated. MS 162b 53r: 1939-1940

One could call Schopenhauer a quite crude mind. I.e.,†c He does have refinement,
but at a certain level this suddenly comes to an end & he is as crude as the
crudest. Where real depth starts, his finishes.

One might say of Schopenhauer: he never takes stock of himself.

=== p. 58 ===

I sit astride life like a bad rider on his mount. I owe it solely to the horse's good
nature that I am not thrown off right now. MS 162b 55v: 1939-1940

'The impression (made by this melody) is completely indescribable.'- That means:
a description is no use (for my purpose); you have to hear the melody.

If art serves 'to arouse feelings', is, perhaps, perceiving it with the senses included
amongst these feelings? MS 162b 59r: 1939-1940*

My originality (if that is the right word) is, I believe, an originality that belongs to
the soil, not the seed. (Perhaps I have no seed of my own.) Sow a seed in my soil,
& it will grow differently than it would in any other soil.

Freud's originality too was like this, I think. I have always believed--without
knowing why--that the original seed of psychoanalysis was due to Breuer, not
Freud. Of course Breuer's seed-grain can only have been quite tiny.

(Courage is always original.)

People nowadays think, scientists are there to instruct them, poets, musicians etc.
to entertain them. That the latter have something to teach them; that never occurs
to them.

Piano playing, a dance of human fingers. MS 162b 59v: 1939-1940

Shakespeare, one might say, displays the dance of human passions. For this reason
he has to be objective, otherwise he would not so much display the dance of
human passions--as perhaps talk about it. But he shows us them in a dance, not
naturalistically. (I got this idea from Paul Engelmann.) MS 162b 61r: 1939-1940

The comparisons of the N.T.†i leave room for as much depth of interpretation†a
as you like. They are bottomless.†b

=== p. 59 ===

They have less style than the first speech of a child. Even a work of supreme art
has something that can be called 'style', yes even something that can be called
'fashion'. MS 162b 63r: 1939-1940

Within all great art there is a WILD animal: tamed.

Not, e.g., in Mendelssohn. All great art has primitive human drives as its ground
bass. They are not the melody (as they are, perhaps, in Wagner), but they are what
gives the melody depth†a & power.

In this sense one may call Mendelssohn a 'reproductive' artist.--

In the same sense: my house for Gretl†25 is the product of a decidedly sensitive
ear, good manners, the expression of great understanding (for a culture, etc.). But
primordial life, wild life striving to erupt into the open--is lacking. And so you
might say,†b health is lacking (Kierkegaard). (Hothouse plant.) MS 122 175 c:

A teacher who can show good, or indeed†c astounding results while he is teaching,
is still not on that account a good teacher, for it may be that, while his pupils are
under his immediate influence, he raises them to a level which is not natural to
them, without developing their own capacities for work at this level, so that they
immediately decline again once the teacher leaves the schoolroom. Perhaps this
holds for me; I have thought about this. (When Mahler was himself conducting,
his private performances†26 were excellent; the orchestra seemed to collapse at
once if†d he was not conducting it himself.) MS 122 190 c: 13.1.1940

'The aim of music: to communicate feelings.'

Connected with this: We may rightly say "he has†e now the same face as
before"--although measurement gave different results in the two cases.

How are the words "the same facial expression" used?--How do we know that
someone is using these words correctly? But how do I know that I am using them
correctly? MS 122 235: 1.2.1940

Not funk but funk conquered is what is worthy of admiration & makes life

=== p. 60 ===

worth having been lived. Courage, not cleverness; not even inspiration, is the grain
of mustard that grows up to be a great tree. To the extent there is courage, there is
connection with life & death. (I was thinking of Labor's & Mendelssohn's organ
music.) But it is not by recognizing the want of courage in someone else, that you
acquire courage yourself. MS 117 151 c: 4.2.1940

One might say: "Genius is courage in one's talent". MS 117 152 c: 4.2.1940

Try to be loved & not-admired.†27 MS 117 153 c: 4.2.1940

Sometimes you have to take an expression out of the language,†a to send it for
cleaning,--& then you can put it back into circulation. MS 117 156: 5.2.1940

How hard it is for me to see what is right in front of my eyes! MS 117 160 c:

You can't be reluctant to give up your lie & still tell the truth. MS 117 168 c:

Writing the right style means, setting the carriage precisely†b on the rails. MS 117

If this stone won't budge at present, if it is wedged in, first move other stones
around it.--

We are only going to set you straight on the track, if your carriage stands on the
rails crookedly; driving†c is something we shall leave you to do by yourself.†d MS

Scraping away mortar is much easier than moving a stone. Well, you have to do

=== p. 61 ===

the one, before you can do the other. MS 117 253: 11.3.1940

What is insidious about the causal approach is that it leads one to say: "Of
course,†a that's how it has to†b happen". Whereas one ought to say: It may have
happened like that, & in many other ways.†c

If we use the ethnological approach does that mean we are saying philosophy is
ethnology? No it only means we are taking up our position far outside, in order to
see the things more objectively. MS 162b 67r: 2.7.1940

One of my most important methods is to imagine a historical development of our
ideas different from what has†d actually occurred. If we do that the problem
shows us a quite new side. MS 162b 68v: 14.8.1940

What I am resisting is the concept of an ideal exactness thought as it were to be
given us a priori. At different times our ideals of exactness are different; & none
of them is preeminent. MS 162b 69v: 19.8.1940

It is often only very slightly more disagreeable to tell the truth than a lie; only
about as much as is drinking bitter rather than sweet coffee; & yet even then I
have a strong inclination to tell the lie. MS 162b 70r: 21.8.1940

(My style is like bad musical composition.)

Don't apologize for anything, don't obscure anything, look & tell how it really
is--but you must see something that sheds a new light on the facts. MS 123 112:

Our greatest stupidities may be very wise. MS 124 3 c: 6.6.1941

=== p. 62 ===

It is incredible how helpful a new drawer can be, suitably placed in our filing
cabinet. MS 124 25: 11.6.1941

You must say something new & yet nothing but what is old. (N.)

You must indeed say only what is old--but all the same something new!

Different 'interpretations' must correspond to different applications.

The poet too must always be asking himself: 'is what I am writing really true then?'
which does not necessarily mean: 'is this how it happens in reality?'.

(...)

It's true you must assemble old material. But for a building.--(W.)†28 MS 124 28:

As we get old the problems slip through our fingers again, as in our youth. It is not
just that we cannot crack them open,†a we can't even keep hold of them. MS 124

What a curious attitude scientists have--: "We still don't know that;†b but it is
knowable & it is only a question of time till we know it"! As if that went without
saying.-- MS 124 49: 16.6.1941

I could imagine someone thinking the names "Fortnum" & "Mason"†29 fitted

=== p. 63 ===

together. MS 124 56: 18.6.1941

Don't demand too much, & don't be afraid that your just demand will melt into
nothing. MS 124 82: 27.6.1941

People who are constantly asking 'why' are like tourists, who stand in front of a
building, reading Baedeker, & through reading about the history of the building's
construction etc etc are prevented from seeing it. MS 124 93: 3.7.1941

Counterpoint might represent an extraordinarily difficult problem for a composer;
the problem namely: given my propensities what should be my relation towards
counterpoint. He may have found a conventional relation

to it yet feel perhaps that it is not his. That it is not clear what the importance of
counterpoint to him ought to be.

(I was thinking of Schubert in this connection; of his still wanting to take lessons
in counterpoint at the end of his life. I think his aim may have been not simply
learning more counterpoint, but rather determining where he stood in relation to
it.) MS 163 25r: 4.7.1941

Wagner's motifs might be called musical prose sentences. And just as there is such
a thing as "rhyming prose", so too these motifs can certainly be put together into
melodic form, but without their constituting one melody.

Wagnerian drama too is not drama, but a stringing together of situations as if on a
thread, which for its part is only cleverly spun but not, like the motifs & situations,
inspired. MS 163 34r: 7.7.1941

Don't let yourself be guided by the example of others, but by nature! MS 163 39r
c: 8.7.1941

=== p. 64 ===

The language used by philosophers is already deformed, as though by shoes that
are too tight. MS 163 47v: 11.7.1941

The characters in a drama arouse our sympathy, they are like people we know,
often like people we love or hate: The characters in the second part of Faust don't
arouse our sympathy at all! We don't feel as though we knew them. They file past
us like thoughts not like human beings. MS 163 64v c: 6.9.1941

The mathematician (Pascal) who admires the beauty of a theorem in number
theory†a; it is as though he were admiring some natural beauty. It's wonderful, he
says, what splendid properties numbers have. It's as though he were admiring the
conformity to laws of a crystal†b.

One might say: what splendid laws the Creator has built into numbers!

You can't construct clouds. And that is why the future you dream of never comes
true.

Before there was an aeroplane people dreamed about aeroplanes & what a world
with them would look like. But, as the reality was nothing like this dream, so we
have no reason to believe that reality will develop in the way we dream. For our
dreams are full of tinsel, like paper hats & costumes. MS 125 2v: 4.1.1942 or later

The popular scientific writings of our scientists are not the expression of hard
work but of resting on their laurels.†a†b†30

If you already have someone's love, no sacrifice is too high a price to pay for it but
any sacrifice is too great†c to buy it. MS 125 21r: 1942

=== p. 65 ===

Virtually as there is such a thing as a deep & a shallow sleep, there are thoughts
which occur deep within one & thoughts which romp about on the surface. MS
125 42r: 1942

You cannot draw the seed up out of the earth. You can only give it warmth†d,
moisture & light & then it must grow. (You mustn't even touch†e it except with
care.) MS 125 44r: 1942

What is pretty cannot be beautiful.------ MS 125 58r: 1942

Someone is imprisoned in a room if the door is unlocked, opens inwards; but it
doesn't occur to him to pull, rather than push against it.

Put someone in the wrong atmosphere & nothing will function as it should. He will
seem unhealthy in every part. Bring him back into his right element, & everything
will blossom and look healthy. But if he is not in his

right element, what then? Well he just has to make the best of looking like a
cripple.

If white turns to black some say: "Essentially it is still the same". And others, if the
colour becomes†a one degree darker, say "It has changed completely." MS 125

Architecture is a gesture. Not every purposive movement of the human body is a
gesture. Just as little as every functional building is architecture. MS 126 15r:

=== p. 66 ===

At present we are combatting a trend. But this trend will die out, superseded by
others. And then people will no longer understand our arguments against it; will
not see why all that needed saying. MS 126 64r: 15.12.1942

Looking for the fallacy in a fishy argument & hunt-the-thimble. MS 126 65v:

Suppose that 2000 years ago someone had invented the shape

& said that one day it would be the shape of an instrument of locomotion.
Or perhaps: that someone had constructed the complete mechanism of the steam
engine without having the least†b idea how it could be used as a motor.†c MS 127
14r: 20.1.1943

What you are taking for a gift is a problem you have to solve.

Genius is what makes us forget the master's talent.

Genius is what makes us forget talent.†d

Where genius wears thin skill may show through.†e (Overture to the
Mastersingers.

=== p. 67 ===

Genius is what makes us unable to see the master's talent.

Only where genius wears thin can you see the talent. MS 127 35v: 4.4.1943

Why shouldn't I apply words in opposition to their original usage? Doesn't e.g.
Freud†a do that when he calls even an anxiety dream a wish-fulfilment dream?
Where is the difference? In the scientific approach the new use is justified through
a theory. And if this theory is false then the new extended use has to be given up
too. But in philosophy the extended use is not supported by true or false opinions
about natural processes. No fact†b justifies it (&)†c non can overturn it.

We say:†d "You understand this expression, don't you? Well, the way you always
understand it†e is the way I too am using it."†f [Not: "... in that meaning..."]

As though meaning were a halo which the word carries over†g†h into every sort
of application MS 127 36v: 27.2.1944

Thoughts at peace. That is the goal someone who philosophizes longs for. MS 127

The philosopher is someone who has to cure many diseases of the understanding
in himself, before he can arrive at the notions of common sense. MS 127 76r: 1944

If in life we are surrounded by death, so too in the health of our understanding by
madness.†i†31 MS 127 77v: 1944

Wanting to think is one thing, having a talent for thinking another. MS 127 78v:

=== p. 68 ===

If there is anything in the Freudian theory of dream interpretation; then it shows
how complicated is the way the human mind makes†a pictures of the facts.

So complicated, so irregular is the mode of representation that it can barely be
called representation any more. MS 127 84r: 1944

It will be hard to follow my portrayal: for it says something new, but still has
eggshells of the old material sticking to it. MS 129 181: 1944 or later

Is it some frustrated longing that makes someone mad? (I was thinking of
Schumann, but of myself too.) MS 165 200 c: ca. 1941-1944

The revolutionary will be the one who can revolutionize himself. MS 165 204: ca.

People are religious to the extent that they believe themselves to be not so much
imperfect as sick.

Anyone who is half-way decent will think himself utterly imperfect, but the
religious person thinks himself wretched

What's ragged should be left ragged.

A miracle is, as it were, a gesture which God makes. As a man sits quietly & then
makes an impressive gesture, God lets the world run on smoothly & then
accompanies the words of a Saint by a symbolic occurrence, a gesture of nature. It
would be an instance if, when a saint has spoken, the trees around him bowed, as
if in reverence.--Now, do I believe that this happens? I don't.

=== p. 69 ===

The only way for me to believe in a miracle in this sense would be to be impressed
by an occurrence in this particular way. So that I should say e.g.: "It was
impossible to see these trees & not to feel that they were responding to the
words." Just as I might say "It is impossible to see the face of this dog & not to see
that he is alert & full of attention to what his master is

doing <">. And I can imagine that the mere report of the words & life of a saint
can make someone believe the reports that the trees bowed. But I am not so
impressed.

When I came home I expected a surprise & there was no surprise for me, so, of
course, I was surprised. MS 128 46: ca. 1944

Go on, believe! It does no harm.

'Believing' means, submitting to an authority. Having once submitted to it, you
cannot then, without rebelling against it, first call it in question & then once again
find it convincing.

A cry of distress cannot be greater than that of one human being.

Or again no distress can be greater than what a single person can suffer.

Hence one human being can be in infinite distress & so need infinite help.

The Christian religion is only for the one who needs infinite help, that is only for
the one who suffers infinite distress.

The whole Earth cannot be in greater distress than one soul.

=== p. 70 ===

Christian faith--so I believe--is refuge in this ultimate distress.

Someone to whom it is given in such distress to open his heart instead of
contracting it, absorbs the remedy into his heart.

Someone who in this way opens his heart to God in remorseful confession opens it
for others too. He thereby loses his dignity as someone special†a & so becomes
like a child. That means without office, dignity & aloofness from others. You can
open yourself to others only out of a particular kind of love. Which acknowledges
as it were that we are all wicked children.

It might also be said: hate between human beings comes from our cutting
ourselves off from each other. Because we don't want anyone else to see inside us,
since it's not a pretty sight in there.

Of course you must continue to feel ashamed of what's within you, but not
ashamed of yourself before your fellow human beings.

There is no greater distress to be felt than that of One human being. For if
someone feels himself lost, that is the ultimate distress. MS 128 49: ca. 1944

Words are deeds.†32 MS 179 20: ca. 1945

Only someone very unhappy has the right to pity someone else. MS 179 26: ca.

It isn't reasonable to be furious even at Hitler; let alone at God. MS 179 27: ca.

When people have died we see their life in a conciliatory light. His life looks

