=== chunk: wittgenstein-1998-culture-and-value/period-1929-1934 ===
title: Remarks 1929–1934 — early Nachlass period
source_pdf: docs/sources/wittgenstein-1998-culture-and-value/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 16-45
page_scheme: pdf
plan_page_start: 16
plan_page_end: 45
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 16 ===

made valuable suggestions, some of which I followed; though in other cases I
obstinately stuck to my original versions.

University of Illinois at Urbana/Champaign Peter Winch

November 1995

The Lieutenant†1 & I have already talked about all kinds of thing; a very nice
man. He is able to get along with the greatest scoundrels & be friendly without
compromising himself. If we hear a Chinese we tend to take his speech for
inarticulate gurgling. Someone who understands Chinese will recognize language
in what he hears. Similarly I often cannot recognize the human being in someone
etc. Worked a bit, but without success. MS 101 7 c: 21.8.1914*

There is no religious denomination in which so much sin has been committed
through the misuse of metaphorical expressions as in mathematics. MS 106 58:

The human gaze has the power of making things precious; though it's true that
they become more costly too. MS 106 247: 1929

I myself still find my way of philosophizing new, & it keeps striking me so afresh,
& that is why I have to repeat myself so often. It will have become part of the
flesh & blood of a new generation & it will find the repetitions boring. For me
they are necessary.--This method consists essentially in leaving the question of
truth and asking about sense instead. MS 105 46 c: 1929*

=== p. 17 ===

It's a good thing I don't let myself be influenced! MS 105 67 c: 1929

A good simile refreshes the intellect. MS 105 73 c: 129

It is hard to tell someone who is shortsighted how to get to a place. Because you
can't say "Look at that church tower ten miles away over there and go in that
direction.<"> MS 105 85 c: 1929

Just let nature speak & acknowledge only one thing higher than nature, but not
what others might think. MS 107 70 c: 1929

You get tragedy where the tree, instead of bending, breaks. Tragedy is something
unjewish. Mendelssohn is perhaps the most untragic of composers. Tragically
holding on, defiantly holding on to a tragic situation in love always seems to me
quite alien to my ideal. Does that mean my ideal

is feeble? I cannot & should not judge. If it is feeble then it is bad. I believe that
fundamentally I have a gentle & calm ideal. But may God protect my ideal from
feebleness & mawkishness! MS 107 72 c: 1929*

A new word is like a fresh seed thrown on the ground of the discussion. MS 107
82 [[sic, c?]]: 1929

Each morning you have to break through the dead rubble afresh so as to reach the
living, warm seed. MS 107 82 c: 1929

With my full philosophical rucksack I can climb only slowly up the mountain of
mathematics. MS 107 97 c: 1929

Mendelssohn is not a peak, but a plateau. His Englishness. MS 107 98 c: 1929

=== p. 18 ===

No one can think a thought for me in the way no one can don my hat for me. MS
107 100 c: 1929

Anyone who listens to a child's crying with understanding will know that psychic
forces, terrible forces, sleep within it, different from anything commonly assumed.
Profound rage & pain & lust for destruction. MS 107 116 c: 1929

Mendelssohn is like a man who is cheerful only when everything is cheerful
anyway, or good only when everyone around him is good, & not self-sufficient
like a tree that stands firmly in its place, whatever may be going on around it. I too
am like that & tend to be so. MS 107 120 c: 1929

My ideal is a certain coolness. A temple providing a setting for the passions
without meddling with them. MS 107 130 c: 1929

I often wonder whether my cultural ideal is a new one, i.e. contemporary, or
whether it comes from the time of Schumann. At least it strikes me as a
continuation of that ideal, though not the continuation that actually followed it
then. That is to say, the second half of the 19th Century has been left out. This, I
ought to say, has happened quite instinctively & and was not the result of
reflection. MS 107 156 c: 10.10.1929

If we think of the world's future, we always mean the place it will get to if it keeps
going as we see it going now and it doesn't occur to us that it is not going in a
straight line but in a curve & that its direction is constantly changing. MS 107 176
c: 24.10.1929

I think good Austrian work (Grillparzer, Lenau, Bruckner, Labor) is particularly
hard to understand. There is a sense in which it is subtler than anything else and
its truth never leans towards plausibility. MS 107 184 c: 7.11.1929

What is Good is Divine too. That, strangely enough, sums up my ethics.

=== p. 19 ===

Only something supernatural can express the Supernatural. MS 107 192 c:

You cannot lead people to the good; you can only lead them to some place or
other; the good lies outside the space of facts. MS 107 196: 15.11.1929

I recently said to Arvid,†2 after I had been watching a very old film with him in
the cinema: A modern film is to an old one as a present-day motor car is to one
built 25 years ago. The impression it makes is just as ridiculous and clumsy & the
way film-making has improved is comparable to the sort of technical improvement
we see in cars. It is not to be compared with the improvement--if it's right to call it
that--of an artistic style. It must be much the same with modern dance music too.
A jazz dance, like a film, must be something that can be improved. What
distinguishes all these developments from the formation of a style is that spirit
plays no part in them.

Today the difference between a good & a poor architect consists in the fact that
the poor architect succumbs to every temptation while the good one resists it.

I once said, & perhaps rightly: The earlier culture will become a heap of rubble &
finally a heap of ashes; but spirits will hover over the ashes. MS 107 229:
10.-11.1.1930

One uses straw to try to stuff the cracks which show in the work of art's

organic unity, but to quiet one's conscience one uses the best straw. MS 107 242:

If anyone should think he has solved the problem of life & feels like telling himself
everything is quite easy now, he need only tell himself, in order to see that he is
wrong, that there was a time when this "solution" had not been discovered; but it
must have been possible to live then too & the solution which has now been

=== p. 20 ===

discovered appears in relation to how things were then like†a an accident. And it
is the same for us in logic too. If there were a "solution to the problems of logic
(philosophy)" we should only have to caution ourselves that there was a time
when they had not been solved (and then too it must have been possible to live
and think)-- MS 108 207: 29.6.1930

Engelmann told me that when he rummages round at home in a drawer full of his
own manuscripts, they strike him as so glorious that he thinks they would be worth
presenting to other people. (He said it's the same when he is reading through
letters from his dead relations.) But when he imagines a selection of them
published he said the whole business loses its charm & value & becomes
impossible I said this case was like the following one: Nothing could be more
remarkable than seeing someone who thinks himself unobserved engaged in some
quite simple everyday activity. Let's imagine a theatre, the curtain goes up & and
we see someone alone in his room walking up and down, lighting a cigarette,
seating himself etc. so that suddenly we are observing a human being from outside
in a way that ordinarily we can never observe ourselves; as if we were watching a
chapter from a biography with our own eyes,--surely this would be at once
uncanny and wonderful. More wonderful than anything that a playwright could
cause to be acted or spoken on the stage. We should be seeing life itself.--But then
we do see this every day & it makes not the slightest impression on us! True
enough, but we do not see it from that point of view.--Similarly when E. looks at
his writings and finds them splendid†b (even though he would not care to publish
any of the pieces individually) he is seeing his life as God's work of art, & and as
such it is certainly worth contemplating, as is every life & everything whatever.
But only the artist can represent the individual thing so that it appears to us as a
work of art; those manuscripts rightly lose their value if we contemplate them
singly & in any case without prejudice, i.e. without being enthusiastic about them
in

advance. The work of art compels us--as one might say--to see it in the right
perspective, but without art the object is a piece of nature like any other & the
fact that we may exalt it through our enthusiasm does not give anyone the right to
display it to us. (I am always reminded of one of those insipid photographs of a
piece of scenery which is interesting to the person who took it because he was
there himself, experienced something, but which a third party looks at with
justifiable coldness; insofar as it is ever justifiable to look at something with
coldness.<)>

But now it seems to me too that besides the work†a†b of the artist there is another
through which the world may be captured sub specie æterni. It is--as I believe--the
way of thought which as it were flies above the world and leaves it the way it is,

=== p. 21 ===

contemplating it from above in its†c flight.†d†e

In Renan's Peuple d'Israël I read: "Birth, sickness, death, madness, catalepsy,
sleep, dreams, all made an infinite impression and, even nowadays, it is given to
only a small number to see clearly that these phenomena have causes within our
constitution<.">†3 On the contrary there is absolutely no reason to marvel at such
things; because they are such everyday occurrences. If primitive human beings
must marvel at them, how much more so dogs & monkeys. Or is it being assumed
that human beings suddenly awoke as it were & noticed these things which had
always been there & were understandably amazed? Well, one might even assume
something like this; not however that they became aware of these things for the
first time, but rather that they suddenly began to marvel at them. But that too has
nothing to do with their being primitive. Unless we call it primitive not to marvel at
things, in which case it is precisely the people of today & Renan himself who are
primitive, if he believes that scientific explanation could enhance wonderment.

As though today lightning were more commonplace or less astounding than 2000
years ago.

In order to marvel human beings--and perhaps peoples--have to wake up. Science
is a way of sending them off to sleep again.

I.e. it is simply false to say: of course, these primitive peoples had to marvel

at everything. But perhaps right that these people did marvel at everything around
them.--To think they had to marvel at them is a primitive superstition. (Like that of
thinking that they had to fear all the forces of nature & that we of course do not
have†a to fear. On the other hand experience may show that certain primitive
tribes are very strongly inclined to fear natural phenomena.--But we cannot
exclude the possibility that highly civilized peoples will become liable to this very
same fear again & their civilization and the knowledge of science will†b not
protect them from this. All the same it is true that the spirit in which science is
carried on nowadays is not compatible with fear of this kind)

What Renan calls the bon sens précoce of the semitic races (an idea that I †c
already entertained a long time ago) is their unpoetic mentality, which heads

=== p. 22 ===

straight for what is concrete. Which is characteristic of my philosophy.

Things are right before our eyes†d, not covered by any veil.--This is where
religion & art part company.

Sketch for a Foreword†4

This book is written for those†e who are in sympathy with the spirit in which it is
written.†f This spirit is, I believe, different from that of the†g prevailing European
and American civilization. The spirit of this civilization the expression of which is
the industry, architecture, music, of present day†h fascism & socialism, is a spirit
that is alien & uncongenial†i to the author. This is not a value judgement. It is not
as though I did not know that†j what today represents itself as architecture is not
architecture & not†k as though he did not approach what is called modern music
with the greatest mistrust (without understanding its language), but the
disappearance of the arts does not justify a disparaging judgement on a whole
segment of humanity. For in these times genuine & strong characters simply turn
away from the field of the arts & towards other things & somehow the value of
the individual finds expression. Not, to be sure, in the way it would at a time of
Great Culture. Culture is like a great organization which assigns to each of its
members his place, at which he

can work in the spirit of the whole, and his strength can with a certain justice be
measured by his success as understood within that whole. In a time without
culture, however, forces are fragmented and the strength of the individual is
wasted through the overcoming of opposing forces & frictional resistances; it is
not manifest in the distance travelled but rather perhaps in the heat generated
through the overcoming of frictional resistances. But energy is still energy & even
if the spectacle afforded by this age is not the coming into being of a great work of
culture in which the best contribute to the same great end, so much as the
unimposing spectacle of a crowd whose best members pursue purely private ends,
still we must not forget that the spectacle is not what matters.
Even if it is clear to me then that the disappearance of a culture does not signify
the disappearance of human value but simply of certain means of expressing this
value, still the fact remains that I contemplate the current of European civilization
without sympathy, without understanding its aims if any. So I am really writing for
friends who are scattered throughout the corners of the globe.

=== p. 23 ===

It is all one to me whether the typical western scientist understands or appreciates
my work since in any case he does not understand the spirit in which I write.

Our civilization is characterized by the word progress. Progress is its form, it is not
one of its properties that it makes progress. Typically it constructs. Its activity is to
construct a more and more complicated structure. And even clarity is only a
means to this end & not an end in itself.

For me on the contrary clarity, transparency, is an end in itself

I am not interested in erecting a building but in having the foundations of possible
buildings transparently before me.

So I am aiming at something different than are the scientists & my thoughts move
differently than do theirs.

Each sentence that I write is trying to say the whole thing, that is, the same thing
over and over again & it is as though they were†a views of one object seen from
different angles.

I might say: if the place I want to reach could only be climbed up to by a ladder, I
would give up trying to get there. For the place to which I really have to go is one
that I must actually be at already.
Anything that can be reached with a ladder does not interest me.

One movement orders one thought to the others in a series, the other keeps aiming
at the same place.

One movement constructs & takes (in hand) one stone after another,†a the other
keeps reaching for the same one.

The danger in a long foreword is that the spirit of a book has to be evident in the
book itself & cannot be described. For if a book has been written for only a few

=== p. 24 ===

readers that will be clear just from the fact that only a few understand it. The book
must automatically separate those who understand it & those who do not. The
foreword too is written just for such as†b understand the book.

Telling someone something he does not understand is pointless, even if you add
that he will not be able to understand it. (That so often happens with someone you
love.)

If you do not want certain people to get into a room, put a lock on it for which
they do not have the key. But it is senseless to talk with them about it, unless you
want them all the same to admire the room from outside!

The decent thing to do is: put a lock on the doors that attracts only those†c who
are able to open it & is not noticed by the rest.

But it's alright to say that the book in my opinion has nothing to do with the
progressive civilization of Europe & America.

That this civilization is perhaps an environment necessary for its spirit but that
they have different aims.

Everything ritualistic (everything that, as it were, smacks of the high priest) is
strictly to be avoided because it straightaway turns rotten†d.
Of course a kiss is a ritual too & it isn't rotten; but no more ritual is permissible
than is as genuine as a kiss.

It is a great temptation to want to make the spirit explicit.
MS 109 204: 6-7.11.1930

When you bump against the limits of your own decency it is as though a whirlpool
of thoughts is generated, (&) an endless regress: you may say what you like, it gets
you no further. MS 109 212: 8.11.1930

I am reading Lessing (on the Bible): "Add to this the verbal clothing and the
style.... absolutely full of tautologies, but of a kind to exercise one's wits by
seeming sometimes to say something different while really saying the same thing,
and at other times seeming to say the same thing while at bottom meaning, or

=== p. 25 ===

being capable of meaning, something different..."†5 MS 110 5:12.12.1930

If I do not quite know how to begin a book that is because something is still
unclear. For I should like to begin with the original data of philosophy, written &
spoken sentences, with books as it were

And here we encounter the difficulty of "Everything is in flux". And perhaps that
is the very point at which to begin.

If someone is merely ahead of his time, it will catch him up one day.

Music, with its few notes & rhythms, seems to some people a primitive art. But
only its surface†a is simple, while the body which makes possible the
interpretation of this manifest content has all the infinite complexity that is
suggested in the external forms of other arts & which music conceals. In a certain
sense it is the most sophisticated art of all.

There are problems I never tackle, which do not lie in my path or belong to my
world. Problems of the intellectual world of the West which Beethoven (&
perhaps Goethe to a certain extent) tackled & wrestled with but which no
philosopher has ever confronted (perhaps Nietzsche passed close to them)
And perhaps they are lost to western philosophy, that is there will be no one there
who experiences and so can describe the development of this culture as an epic.
Or more precisely it just is no longer an epic, or is one

only for someone who observes it from outside & perhaps Beethoven did this with
prevision (as Spengler hints in one place) It might be said that civilization can only
have its epic poet in advance. Just as one can only foresee one's own death and
describe it as something lying in the future, not report it as it happens. So it might
be said: If you want to see the epic of a whole culture written†a you will have to
seek it in the works of its greatest figures and hence seek it at a time when the end
of this culture can only be foreseen, for later there is no one there any more to

=== p. 26 ===

describe it. So it is not to be wondered at that it should be written in the dark
language of prevision†b & intelligible only to the very few.

But I do not get to these problems at all. When I "have done with the world" I
have created an amorphous (transparent) mass & and the world in all its variety is
left on one side like an uninteresting lumber room.

Or perhaps more precisely: the whole outcome of the entire work is for the world
to be set on one side. (A throwing-into-the-lumber-room of the whole world)

In this world (mine) there is no tragedy & with that all the endlessness that gives
rise to tragedy (as its result†c) is lacking

It is as though everything were soluble in the ether;†d there are no harnesses.

This means that hardness & conflict do not become something splendid†e but a
defect.

Conflict is dissipated in much the same way as is the tension of a spring in a
mechanism that you melt (or dissolve in nitric acid). In this†f solution tensions no
longer exist. MS 110 12: 12.-16.1.1931

If I say that my book is meant for only a small circle of people (if that can be
called a circle) I do not mean to say that this circle is in my view the élite of
mankind but it is the circle to which†g I turn (not because they are better or worse
than the others but) because they form my cultural circle, as it

were my fellow countrymen in contrast to the others who are foreign to me.

The limit of language manifests itself in the impossibility of describing the fact that
corresponds to (is the translation of) a sentence without simply repeating the
sentence.

=== p. 27 ===

(We are involved here with the Kantian solution of the problem of philosophy.)

Can I say that drama has its own time which is not a segment of historical time.
I.e. I can speak of earlier and later within it but there is no sense to the question
whether the events in it took place, say, before or after Caesar's death. MS 110 67:

The charming difference in temperature between the parts of a human body. MS
153a 4v: 10.5.1931

It is humiliating having to present oneself as an empty tube only inflated by the
mind.
MS 153a 12v: 1931

No one likes having offended another person; that is why it does everyone good
when the other person doesn't show that he has been offended. Nobody likes
being confronted by a wounded spaniel. Remember that. It is much easier
patiently--& tolerantly†i--to avoid the person that offended you than to approach
him as a friend. You need courage too for that. MS 153a 18v 1931

To treat well somebody who does not like you requires not just great good nature
but great tact too.
MS 153a 29v: 1931

We are struggling with language.

We are engaged in a struggle with language. MS 153a 35r: 1931

Compare the solution of philosophical problems with the fairy tale gift that seems
magical in the enchanted castle and if it is looked at in daylight

=== p. 28 ===

is nothing but an ordinary bit of iron (or something of the sort). MS 153a 35v:

A thinker is very similar to a draughtsman. Who wants†a to represent all the
interconnections. MS 153a 90v: 1931

Pieces of music composed at the keyboard, those by thinking with the pen & those
composed just with imagined sounds must be of quite a different kind†b and make
quite different kinds of impression.

I am sure that Bruckner composed just in his head, imagining the orchestra
playing, Brahms with his pen. Of course this is an oversimplification. But it does
highlight one feature. MS 153a 127v: 1931

A tragedy might really always start with the words: "Nothing at all would have
happened, had it not been that..."

(Had he not been caught in the machine by a corner of his clothing?)

But isn't it a one-sided view of tragedy to think of it merely as showing, that an
encounter can decide one's whole life.

I think today there could be a form of theatre played in masks. The characters
would be just stylized human beings.†c†6 In Kraus's writings this can be clearly
seen. His pieces could be, or should be, performed in masks. Of course this goes
with a certain abstractness in these works. And masked theatre, as I believe, is in
any case the expression of an intellectual character. Perhaps (too) for this reason
only Jews will be attracted to this theatre. MS 153a 128v: 1931

            Frida Schanz:

=== p. 29 ===

            Foggy day. Grey autumn haunts us.

            Laughter seems tainted;

            the world is mute today,

            as though last night it died.

            In the red-gold hedge

            are brewing fog dragons;

            and sleeping lies the day.

            The day will not awaken.

(...)

I took the poem on the previous page from a "Rösselsprung"†i in which of course
the punctuation was not shown. So I do not know if the words "Foggy day" form
the title, or belong to the first line, as I have written it. And it is remarkable how
trivial the poem sounds if it does not begin with "Foggy day" but with "Grey". This
changes the rhythm of the whole poem.†a MS 153a 136r: 1931

What you have achieved cannot mean†b more to others than to you.

As much (as) it has cost you, that is what they will pay. MS 153a 141r: 1931

The Jew is a desert region under whose thin layer of rock lies the molten lava of
spirit. MS 153a 160v: 1931

Grillparzer: "How easy it is to move about in broad distant regions, how hard to
grasp what is individual & near at hand..." MS 153b 3r: 1931

=== p. 30 ===

How should we feel if we had never heard of Christ?

Should we feel left alone in the dark?

Do we not feel like that only in the way a child doesn't when he knows there is
someone in the room with him?

Religious madness is madness springing from irreligiousness. MS 153b 29r: 1931

I look at the photographs of Corsican brigands and reflect: these faces are too hard
& mine too soft for Christianity to be able to write on them. The

faces of the brigands are terrible to behold & yet they are certainly no more
distant from a good life & are simply situated on a different side of it than am I.
MS 153b 39v: 1931

A confession has to be part of one's new life. MS 154 1r: 1931

I never more than half succeed in expressing what I want to express. Indeed not
even so much,†7 but perhaps only one tenth. That must mean something. My
writing is often nothing but "stammering".
MS 154 1v: 1931

The saint is the only Jewish "genius". Even the greatest Jewish thinker is no more
than talented. (Myself for instance.)

I think there is some truth in my idea that I am really only reproductive in my
thinking. I think I have never invented a line of thinking but that it was always
provided for me by someone else & I have done no more than passionately take it
up for my work of clarification. That is how Boltzmann Hertz Schopenhauer
Frege, Russell, Kraus, Loos Weininger Spengler, Sraffa†8 have influenced me.
Can one take Breuer & Freud as an example of Jewish reproductive

=== p. 31 ===

thinking?--What I invent are new comparisons.

At the time I modelled the head for Drobil too the stimulus was essentially a work
of Drobil's & my work was again really one of clarification. I believe that what is
essential is for the activity of clarification to be carried out with COURAGE;
without this it becomes a mere clever game.

The Jew must in a real sense "make nothing his business".†i But for him especially
this is particularly hard because he, as it were, has nothing. It is much harder to be
poor voluntarily if you can't help being poor, than when you might also be rich.

It might be said (rightly or wrongly) that the Jewish mind is not in a

position to produce even so much as a tiny blade of grass or flower but that its
way is to make a drawing of the blade of grass or the flower that has grown in the
mind of another & then use it to sketch a comprehensive picture. This is not to
allege a vice & everything is all right as long as what is being done is quite clear.
Danger arises only when someone confuses the nature of a Jewish work with that
of a non-Jewish work & especially when the author of the former does so himself,
as he so easily may. ("Doesn't he look as proud as though he were being milked
himself."†9<)>
It is typical of the Jewish mind to understand someone else's work better than he
understands it himself.

When I have had a picture suitably framed or have hung it in the right
surroundings I have often caught myself being as proud as though I had painted
the picture. Actually that's not right: not "as proud as though I had painted it" but
as proud as though I had helped to paint it, as though I had so to speak painted a
little bit of it. It is as if an exceptional arranger of grasses were at last to think that
he too had produced at least a quite tiny blade of grass himself. Whereas it ought
to be clear to him that his work lies in a different region altogether.

The process through which even the tiniest & meanest blade of grass comes into
being is quite foreign & unknown to him.

=== p. 32 ===

A picture of a complete apple tree, however accurate, in a certain sense resembles
it infinitely less than does the smallest daisy. And in this sense a symphony by
Bruckner is infinitely more closely related to a symphony from the heroic period
than is one by Mahler. If the latter is a work of art it is one of a totally different
sort. (But this observation itself is actually Spenglerian.)

Anyway when I was in Norway during the year 1913-14 I had some thoughts of
my own, or so at least it seems to me now. I mean that I have the impression of
having given birth to new lines of thinking at that time (But perhaps I am
mistaken). Whereas now I seem just to apply old ones. MS 154 15v: 1931

There is something Jewish in Rousseau's character. MS 154 20v: 1931

If it is said on occasion that (someone's) philosophy is a matter of temperament,
there is some truth in this. A preference for certain comparisons is something we
call a matter of temperament & far more disagreements

rest on this than appears at first sight.†a

"Look on this wart†b as a regular limb of your body!" Can one do that, to order?

Do I have the power to decide at will to have, or not to have, a certain ideal
conception of my body?

Within the history of the peoples of Europe the history of the Jews is†10 not
treated so circumstantially as their intervention in European affairs would actually
merit, because within this history they are experienced as a sort of disease,
anomaly, & nobody wants to put a disease on the same level as normal life†c [[sic
. ?]]

We may say: this bump can be regarded as a limb of one's body only if our whole
feeling for the body changes (if the whole national feeling for the body changes).
Otherwise the best we can do is put up with it.

You may expect an individual to display this sort of tolerance or even to disregard
such things; but you cannot expect this of a nation since it is only a nation by

=== p. 33 ===

virtue of not disregarding such things. I.e. there is a contradiction in expecting
someone to retain the original aesthetic feeling for his body & also to make the
swelling welcome.

Power & possession are not the same thing. Even though possession also gives us
power. If Jews are said not to have any sense for possession that is presumably
compatible with their liking to be rich; for money is for them a particular sort of
power not possession. (I should for instance not like my people to be poor, since I
wish them to have a certain power. Naturally I wish them to use this power
properly too.)

There is definitely a certain kinship between Brahms & Mendelssohn; but I do not
mean that shown by the individual passages in Brahms's works that are
reminiscent of passages in Mendelssohn but the kinship of which I am speaking
could be expressed by saying that Brahms does with complete rigour what
Mendelssohn did half-rigorously. Or: Brahms is often Mendelssohn without the
flaws.

=== p. 34 ===

†11 That must be the end of a theme which I cannot place†i. It occurred to me
today as I was thinking about my work in philosophy & said to myself: "I destroy,
I destroy, I destroy--" MS 154 21v: 1931

=== p. 35 ===

It has sometimes been said that the Jews' secretive & cunning nature is a result of
their long persecution. That is certainly untrue; on the other hand it is certain that,
despite this persecution, they continue to exist only because they have the
inclination towards this secretiveness. As we may say that such & such an animal
has escaped extinction only because it has the possibility or capability of
concealing itself. Of course I do not mean that one should commend this ability
for such a reason, not by any means.

In Bruckner's music nothing is left of the long & slender (nordic?) face of Nestroy,
Grillparzer, Haydn, etc. but it has in full measure a round full (alpine?) face even
purer in type than was Schubert's.

The power of language to make everything look the same which appears in its
crassest form in the dictionary & which makes it possible to personify time,
something which is no less remarkable than would have been making divinities of
the logical constants. MS 154 25v: 1931

A beautiful garment that changes (coagulates as it were) into worms &

serpents if its wearer smugly smartens himself up†12 in it in the mirror. MS 155

The pleasure I take in my thoughts is pleasure in my own strange life. Is this joi de
vivre? MS 155 46r: 1931

By the way in†a the old conception--roughly that of the (great) western
philosophers--there were two†b sorts of problem in the scientific sense: essential,
great, universal, & inessential, as it were accidental, problems. Our conception on
the contrary is that there is no great essential problem in the scientific sense.†i MS

=== p. 36 ===

Structure & feeling in music. Feelings accompany our grasp of a piece of music as
they accompany events in our life. MS 110 226: 25.6.1931

Labor's seriousness is a very late seriousness. MS 110 231 c: 29.6.1931

Talent is a spring from which fresh water is constantly flowing. But this spring
loses its value if it is not used†c in the right way. MS 110 238: 30.6.1931

"What a sensible man knows is hard to know." Does Goethe's contempt for
laboratory experiment and his exhortation to go out into uncontrolled nature &
learn from that, does this have some connection with the idea that a hypothesis
(wrongly conceived) is already a falsification of the truth? And with the beginning
I am now thinking of for my book which might consist of a description of
nature?†d MS 110 257: 2.7.1931

If people find a flower or an animal ugly they always have an impression as
though they were artifacts. "It looks like a ..." they say. This sheds light on the
meaning of the words "ugly" & "beautiful". MS 110 260 c: 2.7.1931

Labor, when he writes good music, is absolutely unromantic. That is a very
remarkable & significant indication. MS 111 2c: 7.7.1931

Reading the Socratic dialogues, one has the feeling: what a frightful waste of time!
What's the point of these arguments that prove nothing & clarify nothing. MS 111

The story of Peter Schlemihl†13 should, it seems to me, go†a like this: He makes
over his soul to the Devil for money. Then he repents it & now the Devil demands
his shadow as ransom. But Peter Schlemihl still has a choice between giving the
Devil his soul or sacrificing along with his shadow life in community with human

=== p. 37 ===

beings. MS 111 77:11.8.1931

In Christianity it is as though God said to human beings: Don't act a tragedy, that
is to say, don't enact heaven & hell on earth, heaven & hell are my affair. MS 111

Spengler could be better understood if he said: I am comparing different periods
of culture with the lives of families; within the family there is a family
resemblance, while you will also find a resemblance between members of different
families; family resemblance differs from the other sort of resemblance in such &
such ways etc.. What I mean is: We have to be told the object of comparison, the
object from which this approach is derived, so that prejudices do not constantly
slip into the discussion. Because then we shall willy nilly ascribe what is true†b of
the prototype of the approach†c to the object to which we are applying the
approach as well; & we claim "it must always be..."

This comes about because we want to give the prototype's characteristics a
foothold in the approach. But since we confuse prototype & object we find
ourselves dogmatically conferring on the object properties which only the
prototype necessarily possesses. On the other hand we think the approach will
lack the†d generality we want to give it if it really holds only of the one case. But
the prototype must just be presented for what it is; as characterizing the whole
approach and determining its form. In this way it stands at the head & is generally
valid by virtue of determining the form of approach, not by virtue of a claim that
everything which is true only of it

holds for all the objects to which the approach is applied.

One should thus always ask when exaggerated dogmatic claims are made: What is
actually true in this. Or again: In what case is that actually true MS 111 119:

From Simplicissimus: riddles of technology.

(Picture: two professors in front of a bridge under construction) Voice from above:
"Fotch it dahn--coom on--fotch it dahn A tell tha--we'll turn it t'other rooad
sooin!"†i --"It really is quite incomprehensible, my dear colleague, how such
complicated & precise work can be carried out in this language." MS 111 132:

=== p. 38 ===

We keep hearing the remark that philosophy really does not progress, that we are
still occupied with the same philosophical problems as were the Greeks. Those
who say this however don't understand why it is so.†a It is because our language
has remained the same & keeps seducing us into asking the same questions. As
long as there is still a verb 'to be' that looks as though it functions in the same way
as 'to eat' and 'to drink', as long as we still have the adjectives 'identical', 'true',
'false', 'possible', as long as we continue to talk of a river of time & an expanse of
space, etc., etc., people will keep stumbling over the same cryptic difficulties &
staring at something that no explanation seems capable of clearing up.

And this satisfies besides a longing for the supernatural†b for in so far as people
think they can see the "limit of human understanding", they believe of course that
they can see beyond it.

I read: "philosophers are no nearer to the meaning of 'Reality' than Plato got;..."
What a singular†c situation. How singular then that Plato has been able to get†d
even as far as he did! Or that we could get no further afterwards! Was it because
Plato was so clever? MS 111 133: 24.8.1931

Kleist wrote somewhere†14 that what the poet would most of all like to be able to
do, would be to convey thoughts in themselves†a without words. (What a strange
avowal.) MS 111 173: 13.9.1931

It is often said that a new religion brands the gods of the old one as devils. But in
reality they have presumably by that time already become devils. MS 111
180:13.9.1931

The works of the great masters are stars†b which rise and set around us. So the
time will come again for every great work that is now in the descendent. MS 111

(Mendelssohn's music, when it is flawless, consists of musical arabesques. That is

=== p. 39 ===

why we feel embarrassed at every lack of rigour in his work.)

In Western Civilization the Jew is always being measured according to calibrations
which do not fit him. That the Greek thinkers were neither philosophers in the
western sense, nor scientists in the western sense, that those who took part in the
Olympic Games were not sportsmen & fit into <no> western occupation, is clear
to many people. But it is the same with the Jews too†c

And insofar as the words of our <language> seem to us the only possible standards
of measurement we are always doing him†d injustice. And he is†e first
overestimated then underestimated. In this context Spengler is quite right not to
classify Weininger with the western philosophers.†f†15

Nothing we do can be defended definitively. But only by reference to something
else that is established.

I.e. no reason can be given why you should act (or should have acted) like this,
except that by doing so you bring about such and such a situation, which again
you have to accept as an aim. MS 111 195: 13.9.1931

The inexpressible (what I find enigmatic & cannot express) perhaps provides the
background, against which whatever I was able to express acquires meaning. MS

Work on philosophy--like work in architecture in many respects--is really more
work†a on oneself. On one's own conception. On how one sees things. (And what
one expects of them.) MS 112 46: 14.10.1931

The philosopher easily gets into the position of an incompetent manager who,
instead of doing his own work & simply seeing to it†b that his employees do theirs
properly takes over their work & so finds himself one day overloaded with other
people's work, while the employees look on and criticize him. MS 112 60:

=== p. 40 ===

The idea is worn out by now & no longer usable. (I once heard Labor make a
similar remark about musical ideas.) In the way silver paper, once crumpled, can
never quite be smoothed out again. Nearly all my ideas are a bit crumpled. MS 112

I really do think with my pen, for my head often knows nothing of what my hand
is writing.

(Philosophers are often like little children who first scribble some marks on a piece
of paper at random and now†c ask the grown-up "what's that?"--It happened like
this: The grown-up had often drawn something for the child & said: "this is a
man", "this is a house" etc. And now the child makes some marks too and asks:
and what's this then?" MS 112 114: 27.10.1931

Ramsey was a bourgeois thinker. I.e. he thought with the aim of clearing up the
affairs of some particular community. He did not reflect on the essence of the
state--or at least he did not like doing so--but on how this state might reasonable
be organized. The idea that this state might not be the only possible one partly
disquieted him and partly bored him. He wanted to get down as quickly as possible
to reflecting on the foundations--of this state. This was what he was good at &
what really interested him; whereas real philosophical reflection disquieted him
until he put its result (if it had one) on one side as trivial. MS 112 139: 1.11.1931

A curious analogy could be based on the fact that the eye-piece of even the hugest
telescope cannot be bigger†a than our eye. MS 112 153: 11.11.1931

Tolstoy: the meaning (importance) of something lies in its being something
everyone can understand. That is both true & false. What makes the object hard
to understand--if it's significant, important--is not that you have to be instructed in
abstruse matters in order to understand it, but the antithesis between
understanding the object & what most people want to see. Because of this
precisely what is most obvious may be what is most difficult to understand. It is
not a difficulty for the intellect but one for the will that has to be overcome. MS

=== p. 41 ===

Someone who teaches philosophy nowadays gives his pupil foods, not†b because
they are to his taste, but in order to change his taste. MS 112 223: 22.11.1931

I must be nothing more than the mirror in which my reader sees his own thinking
with all its deformities & with this assistance can set it in order. MS 112 225:

Language sets everyone the same traps; it is an immense network of well kept†c
wrong turnings. And hence we see one person after another walking down the
same paths & we know in advance the point at which they will branch off, at
which they will walk straight on without noticing the turning, etc., etc. So what I
should do is erect signposts at all the junctions where there are wrong turnings, to
help people past the danger points.

What Eddington says about the 'direction of time' & the principle of entropy
amounts to saying that time would reverse its direction if people began one day to
walk backwards. If you like you can by all means call it that; but then you must be
clear in your mind that you have said no more than that people have changed the
direction in which they walk. MS 112 231: 22.11.1931

Someone divides human beings into buyers & sellers, & forgets that buyers are
sellers as well. If I remind him of this,†a is his grammar changed? MS 112 232:

The real achievement of a Copernicus or a Darwin was not the discovery of a true
theory but of a fertile new point of view. MS 112 233: 22.11.1931

I believe that what Goethe was really seeking was not a physiological but a
psychological theory of colours. MS 112 255: 26.11.1931

Philosophers who say: "after death a timeless state will supervene", or "at death a
timeless state supervenes" & do not notice that they have used in a temporal sense

=== p. 42 ===

the words "after" & "at" & "supervenes" & that temporality is embedded in their
grammar. MS 113 80: 29.2.1932

Remember the impression made by good architecture, that it expresses a thought.
One would like to respond to it too with a gesture. MS 156a 25r: ca. 1932-1934

Don't play with what lies deep in another person! MS 156a 30v: ca. 1932-1934

The face is the soul of the body. MS 156a 49r: ca. 1932-1934

One cannot view†b one's own character from outside any more than one's own
handwriting.

I have a one-sided relation to my handwriting that prevents me from seeing &
comparing it with the writing of others on the same footing. MS 156a 49v: ca.

In art it is hard to say anything, that is as good as: saying nothing. MS 156a 57r:
ca. 1932-1934

My thinking, like everyone's, has sticking to it the shrivelled husks†a of my earlier
(withered) thoughts.
MS 156a 58v: ca. 1932-1934

The strength of the musical thinking in Brahms. MS 156b 14v: ca. 1932-1934

The various plants & their human character: rose, ivy, grass, oak, apple tree, corn
palm. Compared with the diverse character of words MS 156b 23v: ca. 1932-1934

=== p. 43 ===

If one wanted to characterize the essence of Mendelssohn's music one could do it
by saying that there is perhaps no music by Mendelssohn that is hard to
understand. MS 156b 24v: ca. 1932-1934

Every artist has been influenced by others & shows (the) traces of that influence
in his works; but what we get from him is all the same only his own personality†b.
What is inherited from others can be nothing but egg shells. We should treat the
fact of their presence with indulgence but they will not give us Spiritual
nourishment.

It seems to me (sometimes) as though I were already†c philosophizing with
toothless gums & as though I took speaking without teeth for the right way, the
more worthwhile way. I detect something similar in Kraus. Instead of my
recognizing it as a deterioration. MS 156b 32r: ca. 1932-1934

If someone says, let's suppose, "A's eyes have a more beautiful expression than
B's", then I want to say that he certainly does not mean by the word beautiful
what is common to everything that we call "beautiful". Rather he is playing a
game with this word that has quite narrow bounds. But what shows this? Did I
have in mind some particular restricted explanation of the word "beautiful"?
Certainly not.--But perhaps I shall not even want to compare the beauty of
expression in a pair of eyes with the beauty in the shape of a nose.

Indeed we might perhaps say: If a language had two words so that there was no
indication of anything common to these cases I should have no trouble taking one
of these two specialized words for my case & nothing would be lost from the
sense of what I wanted to say.
One might say: how would I explain the word 'rule' or 'plant' in the particular case
then? that will show 'what I mean by it'.

Suppose I had said: "the gardener raises very beautiful plants in this greenhouse". I
want to communicate something to my hearer with this & the question arises: for
this does he have to know what is common to everything that we call "plant"? No.
I could quite well have given him the explanation for the case in hand by means of
a few examples or a few pictures.

=== p. 44 ===

In the same way if I say: "I will just explain the rules of this game to you", do I
presuppose that the other knows everything that is common to what we call
"rule"? MS 145 14r: Autumn 1933*

If I say A. has beautiful eyes I may be asked: What do you find beautiful about his
eyes & perhaps I will answer: the almond shape, the long lashes, the delicate lids.

What do these eyes have in common with a Gothic church that I also find
beautiful? Am I to say they make a similar impression on me? What if I said: what
they have in common is that in both cases my hand is tempted to draw them? That
at any rate would be a narrow definition of the†a beautiful.

It will often be possible to say: ask what your reasons are for calling something
good or beautiful & the particular grammar of the word "good" in this case will be
apparent. MS 145 17v: 1933

I believe I summed up where I stand in relation to philosophy when I said: really
one should write philosophy only as one writes a poem. That, it seems to me, must
reveal how far my thinking belongs to the present, the future, or the past. For I
was acknowledging myself, with these words, to be someone who cannot quite do
what he would like to be able to do. MS 146 25v: 1933-1934

If you use a trick in logic, whom can you be tricking but yourself? MS 146 35v:

Composers' names. Sometimes it is the method of projection that we treat as
given. When we, say, ask What name would hit off this person's character But
sometimes we project the character into the name & treat that as given. Thus we
get the impression that the great masters we know so well have just the names that
suit their work. MS 146 44v: 1933-1934

If someone prophesies that the generation to come will take up these problems &
solve them that is usually a sort of wishful thinking, a way of excusing oneself for
what one should have accomplished & hasn't. A father would like his son to
achieve what he has not achieved so that the task he left unresolved should find a
resolution nevertheless. But his son is faced with a new task. I mean: the wish that

=== p. 45 ===

the task should not remain unfinished disguises itself as a prediction that it will be
taken further by the next generation. MS 147 16r: 1934

The overwhelming skill in Brahms. MS 147 22r: 1934

If I say: "that is the only thing that is really seen" I point in front of me. If I were
to point sideways or behind me however--at things that I did not see--this pointing
would lose all its sense for me. That means, though that my pointing in front of me
is not contrasted with anything.

(Someone who is in a hurry will when sitting in a car push involuntarily, even
though he may tell himself that he is not pushing the car at all.) MS 157a 2r: 1934*

By the way, in my artistic activities I have merely good manners. MS 157a 22v:

In the days of silent films all the classics were played with the films, except
Brahms & Wagner.

Not Brahms because he is too abstract. I can imagine an exciting scene in a film
accompanied with music by Beethoven or Schubert & might gain some sort of
understanding of the music from the film. But not an understanding of music by
Brahms. Bruckner on the other hand does go with a film. MS 157a 44v: 1934 or

The queer resemblance between a philosophical investigation (perhaps especially
in mathematics <)> and one in aesthetics. (E.g. what is bad about this garment,
how it should be, etc..) MS 116 56: 1937

The edifice of your pride has to be dismantled. And that means frightful work.
MS 157a 57r: 1937

In one day you can experience the horrors of hell; that is plenty of time. MS 157a

