=== chunk: wittgenstein-1998-culture-and-value/period-1945-1948 ===
title: Remarks 1945–1948 — post-war period
source_pdf: docs/sources/wittgenstein-1998-culture-and-value/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 70-108
page_scheme: pdf
plan_page_start: 70
plan_page_end: 108
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 70 ===

Christian faith--so I believe--is refuge in this ultimate distress.

Someone to whom it is given in such distress to open his heart instead of
contracting it, absorbs the remedy into his heart.

Someone who in this way opens his heart to God in remorseful confession opens it
for others too. He thereby loses his dignity as someone special†a & so becomes
like a child. That means without office, dignity & aloofness from others. You can
open yourself to others only out of a particular kind of love. Which acknowledges
as it were that we are all wicked children.

It might also be said: hate between human beings comes from our cutting
ourselves off from each other. Because we don't want anyone else to see inside us,
since it's not a pretty sight in there.

Of course you must continue to feel ashamed of what's within you, but not
ashamed of yourself before your fellow human beings.

There is no greater distress to be felt than that of One human being. For if
someone feels himself lost, that is the ultimate distress. MS 128 49: ca. 1944

Words are deeds.†32 MS 179 20: ca. 1945

Only someone very unhappy has the right to pity someone else. MS 179 26: ca.

It isn't reasonable to be furious even at Hitler; let alone at God. MS 179 27: ca.

When people have died we see their life in a conciliatory light. His life looks

=== p. 71 ===

well-rounded through a haze. For him it was not well-rounded however, but jagged
& incomplete. For him there was no conciliation; his life is naked & wretched. MS
180a 30: ca. 1945

It is as though I had lost my way & asked someone the way home. He says he will
show me and walks with me along a nice smooth path. This suddenly comes to an
end. And now my friend says: "All you have to do now is to find the rest of the
way home from here.<">†33 MS 180a 67: ca. 1945

The less somebody knows & understands himself the less great he is, however
great may be his talent. For this reason our scientists are not great. For this reason
Freud, Spengler, Kraus, Einstein are not great. MS 130 239: 1.8.1946*

Schubert is irreligious & melancholy. MS 130 283: 5.8.1946

Are all people great human beings? No.--Well then, what hope can you have of
being a great human being! Why should something be given you that is not given
your fellows? To what purpose?!--If it isn't your wish to be rich that makes you
think you are rich, then it must be some observation some experience that shows
you it! And what experience do you have (except that of vanity)? Simply that you
have a talent. And my conceit of

being an extraordinary human being is of course much older than my experience,
of my particular talent. MS 130 291 c: 9.8.1946

Schubert's melodies can be said to be full of climaxes, & this cannot be said of
Mozart's; Schubert is baroque. You can point to particular places in a Schubert
melody & say: look, that is the point of this melody, this is where the idea comes
to a head.

The melodies of different composers can be approached by applying the principle:
every species of tree is a 'tree' in a different sense of the word. I.e. Don't let
yourself be misled by our saying they are all melodies. They are steps along a path
that leads from something you would not call a melody to something else that you

=== p. 72 ===

again would not call one. If you simply look at the sequences of notes & the
changes of key all these structures no doubt appear on the same level. But if you
look at the field of force in which they stand (and hence at their significance), you
will be inclined to say: Here melody is something quite different than there (here it
has a different origin, plays a different role, inter alia. MS 131 2: 10.8.1946

The idea working its way towards the light. MS 131 19: 11.8.1946

The remark by Jucundus in 'The Lost Laugh'†34, that his religion consisted in: his
knowing, if things are going well for him now,†a that his fate could take a turn for
the worse--this actually is an expression of the same religion as the saying "The
Lord hath given, the Lord hath taken away". MS 131 27: 12.8.1946

It is hard to understand yourself properly since something that you might be doing
out of generosity & goodness is the same as you may be doing out of cowardice or
indifference. To be sure, one may act in such & such a way from true love, but
also from deceitfulness & from a cold heart too. Similarly not all moderation is
goodness. And only if I could be submerged in religion might these doubts be
silenced. For only religion could destroy vanity & penetrate every nook & cranny.
MS 131 38: 14.8.1946

What I want to say then is: Someone who--e.g.--cannot EXPERIENCE

the word "pas" in "je ne sais pas" as "step", cannot be taught an expression of
voice†a by being told "speak it with this meaning".

If you are reading aloud and want to read well, you accompany the words with
more vivid images. At least it is often like that. Sometimes though ["To Corinth
from Athens..."]†35 it is the punctuation, i.e., the precise intonation & the length
of the pauses that is all that matters to us. MS 131 43: 14.8.1946*

It is remarkable how hard we find it to believe something the truth of which we do
not see for ourselves. If e.g. I hear expressions of admiration for Shakespeare
made by the distinguished men of several centuries, I can never rid myself of a

=== p. 73 ===

suspicion that praising him has been a matter of convention, even though I have to
tell myself that this is not the case. I need the authority of a Milton to be really
convinced. In his case I take it for granted that he was incorruptible.--But of
course I don't mean to deny by this that an enormous amount of praise has been &
still is lavished on Shakespeare without understanding & for specious reasons by a
thousand professors of literature. MS 131 46: 15.8.1946

Grasping the difficulty in its depth is what is hard.

For if you interpret it in a shallow way the difficulty just remains. It has to be
pulled out by the root; & that means, you have to start thinking about these things
in a new way. The change is as decisive e.g. as that from the alchemical to the
chemical way of thinking.--The new way of thinking is what is so hard to
establish.

Once it†b is established the old problems disappear; indeed it becomes hard to
recapture them. For they are embedded in the way we express ourselves; & if we
clothe ourselves in a new form of expression, the old problems are discarded along
with the old garment.†c MS 131 48: 15.8.1946

The hysterical fear of the atom bomb the public now has, or at least expresses, is
almost a sign that here for once a really salutary discovery has been made. At least
the fear gives the impression of being fear in the face of a really effective bitter
medicine. I cannot rid myself of the thought: if there

were not something good here, the philistines would not be making an outcry. But
perhaps this too is a childish idea. For all I can mean really is that the bomb
creates the prospect of the end, the destruction of a ghastly evil, of disgusting
soapy water science and certainly that is not an unpleasant thought; but who is to
say what would come after such a destruction? The people now making speeches
against the production of the bomb are undoubtedly the dregs of the intelligentsia,
but even that does not prove beyond question that what they abominate is to be
welcomed. MS 131 66c: 19.8.1946

In former times people entered monasteries. Were they perhaps simple-minded, or
obtuse people?--Well, if people like that took such measures so as to be able to go

=== p. 74 ===

on living, the problem cannot be an easy one! MS 131 79 c: 20.8.1946

The human being is the best picture of the human soul.†36 MS 131 80:20.8.1946

Shakespeare's similes are, in the ordinary sense, bad. So if they are nevertheless
good--& I don't know whether they are or not--they must be a law to themselves.
Perhaps e.g. their ring makes them convincing & gives them truth.

It might be the case that with S. the essential thing is his effortlessness, his
arbitrariness, so that if you are to be able really to admire him, you just have to
accept him as he is in the way you accept nature, a piece of scenery e.g.

If I am right about this, that would mean that the style of his whole work, I mean,
of his complete works†a is in this case what is essential, & provides the
justification.

That I do not understand him could then be explained by the fact that I cannot
read him with ease. Not, that is, as one views a splendid piece of scenery. MS 131
163:31.8.1946

A man sees well enough what he has, but not what he is. What he is can be
compared with his height above sea level, which you cannot for the most part
judge straight off. And the greatness, or triviality, of a work depends on where its
creator stands.

But you can equally say: someone who misjudges himself is never great: someone
who throws dust in his own eyes. MS 131 176: 1.9.1946

How small a thought it takes to fill a whole life!

=== p. 75 ===

Just as someone may travel around the same little country throughout his whole
life, & think there is nothing outside it!

You see everything in a queer perspective (or projection): the country that you
ceaselessly keep covering, strikes you as enormously big; the surrounding
countries seem to you like narrow border regions.†a MS 131 180: 2.9.1946

To go down into the depths you don't need to travel far; you can do it in your own
backgarden.†b MS 131 182: 2.9.1946

It is very remarkable, that we should be inclined to think of civilization--houses,
streets, cars, etc--as separating man from his origin, from the lofty, eternal, etc.
Our civilized environment, even its trees & plants, seems to us then cheap,
wrapped†c in cellophane, & isolated from everything great & from God as it were.
It is a remarkable picture that forces itself on us here. MS 131 186: 3.9.1946

My 'achievement' is very much like a mathematician's,†d who invents a new
calculus.†e MS 131 218: 8.9.1946

If people did not sometimes commit stupidities, nothing intelligent at all would
ever happen. MS 131 219: 8.9.1946

The purely corporeal can be uncanny. Compare the way†f angels & devils are
portrayed. A so-called "miracle" must be connected with this. It must be as it were
a sacred gesture. MS 131 221: 8.9.1946

The way you use the word "God" does not show whom you mean,†a but what you
mean. MS 132 8: 11.9.1946

In a bullfight the bull is the hero of a tragedy. First driven mad by suffering, he
dies a slow & terrible death. MS 132 12: 12.9.1946

=== p. 76 ===

A hero looks death in the face, real death, not just a picture of death. Behaving
decently in a crisis does not mean being able to act the part of a hero well, as in
the theatre, it means rather being able to look death itself in the eye.

For an actor may play a multitude of roles, but in the end it is after all he himself,
the human being, who has to die. MS 132 46 c: 22.9.1946

What does it consist in: following a musical phrase with understanding? Observing
a face with a feeling†b for its expression? Drinking in the expression on the face?

Think of the demeanour of someone who draws the face with understanding for its
expression. Think of the sketcher's face his movements;--what shows that every
stroke he makes is†i dictated by the face, that nothing in his sketch is arbitrary,
that he is a delicate instrument?

Is that really an experience? I mean: can we say that this expresses an experience?

Once again: what does it consist in, following a musical phrase with
understanding, or, playing it with understanding? Don't look inside yourself. Ask
yourself rather, what makes you say that's what someone else is doing. And what
prompts you to say he has a particular experience? Indeed, do we ever actually
say that? Wouldn't I be more likely to say of someone else that he's having a whole
host of experiences†ii?

I would perhaps say: "He is experiencing the theme intensely"; but ask yourself,
what the expression of this†c is?†d†e

Then again you might think intensive experiencing of the theme 'consists' in the
sensations of the movements etc. with which we accompany it. And that seems
(again) like a soothing explanation. But have you any reason to think it true? I
mean, e.g., a recollection of this experience? Is not this theory again merely a
picture? No, this is not how things are: the theory is no more than an attempt to
link up the expressive movements with an 'experience'.

=== p. 77 ===

If you ask: how I experienced the theme, I shall perhaps say "As a question" or
something of the sort, or I shall whistle it with expression etc. MS 132 51:

"He is experiencing the theme intensely. Something is happening in him when†a
he hears it." Well, what?

Does the theme point to nothing beyond itself? Oh yes! But that means:--The
impression it makes on me is connected with things in its surroundings--e.g. with
the existence of the German language & of its intonation, but that means with the
whole field†i of our language games.†37

If I say e.g.: it's as if here a conclusion were being drawn, or, as if here something
were being confirmed, or, as if this were a reply to what came earlier,--then the
way I understand it clearly presupposes familiarity with conclusions,
confirmations, replies, etc.

A theme, no less than a face, wears an expression.

"The repeat is necessary" In what respect is it necessary? Well, sing it, then you
will see that it is only the repeat that gives it its tremendous power.--Don't we feel
then as though a model for this theme must in this case exist in reality, & as
though the theme only approached it, corresponded to it, once this part were
repeated Or am I to utter the inanity: 'It just sounds more beautiful with the
repeat'? (You see there by the way what an inane role the word "beautiful" plays
in aesthetics) And yet there just is no paradigm there other than the theme. And
yet again there is a paradigm other than the theme: namely the rhythm of our
language, of our thinking & feeling. And furthermore the theme is a new part of
our language, it becomes incorporated in it; we learn a new gesture.

The theme interacts with language.

=== p. 78 ===

It is one thing to sow in thought, another to reap in thought.

The last two bars of the "Death & the Maiden" theme, the                    ; you may
think first that this figure is conventional, ordinary, until you understand its deeper
expression. I.e. until you understand that here the ordinary is filled with
significance. MS 132 59: 25.9.1946

"Fare well!"

"A whole world of pain lies in these words" How can it live†a in them?--It is
bound up with them. The words are like the acorn from which an oak tree can
grow.

But where is the law laid down, according to which the tree grows out of the
acorn? Well, the picture is incorporated into our thinking as a result of
experience.†b MS 132 62: 25.9.1946*

Esperanto. Our feeling of disgust, when we utter an invented word with invented
derivative syllables. The word is cold, has no associations & yet plays at
'language'. A system of purely written signs would not disgust us like this. MS 132

You could attach prices to ideas. Some cost a lot some little. [Broad's ideas all cost
very little.] And how do you pay for ideas? I believe: with courage. MS 132 75:
28.9.1946*

If life becomes hard to bear we think of improvements†c. But the most important
& effective improvement,†d in our own attitude, hardly occurs to us, & we can
decide on this only with the utmost difficulty.†e MS 132 136: 7.10.1946

It's possible to write in a style that is unoriginal in form--like mine--but with well
chosen words; or on the other hand in one that is original in form, freshly grown
from within oneself. (And also of course in one which is botched together just
anyhow out of old furnishings†f.) MS 32 145: 8.10.1946

=== p. 79 ===

Amongst other things Christianity says, I believe, that sound doctrines are all
useless. That you have to change your life. (Or the direction of your life.)

That all wisdom is cold; & that you can no more use it for setting your life to
rights, than you can forge iron when it is cold.

For a sound doctrine need not seize you; you can follow it, like a doctor's
prescription.--But here you have to be seized & turned around by something.--(I.e.
this is how I understand it.) Once turned round, you must stay turned round.

Wisdom is passionless. By contrast Kierkegaard calls faith a passion. MS 132 167:

Religion is as it were the calm sea bottom at its deepest, remaining calm, however
high the waves rise on the surface.-- MS 132 190: 16.10.1946

"I never before believed in God"--that I understand. But not: "I never before
really believed in Him." MS 132 191: 18.10.1946

I often fear madness. Have I any reason to assume that this fear does not spring
from, so to speak, an optical illusion: of seeing something as an abyss that is close
by, when it isn't? The only experience I know of that speaks for its not being an
illusion, is the case of Lenau. For in his "Faust" there are thoughts of a kind I too
am familiar with. Lenau puts them into Faust's mouth, but they are no doubt his
own about himself. What is important is what Faust says about his loneliness or
isolation.

His talent too strikes me as similar to mine: A lot of froth--but a few fine thoughts.
The stories in his Faust are all bad, but the observations often true & great. MS

Lenau's Faust is remarkable in that here man has dealings only with the Devil.
God does not stir himself. MS 132 202: 20.10.1946

=== p. 80 ===

In my view Bacon was not a precise thinker. He had large, as it were broad,
visions But someone who has nothing but these is bound to be generous with
promises, inadequate in keeping them. You may envision a flying machine without
being precise about its details. Outwardly you may†a imagine it as very similar to
a proper aeroplane, & describe its functioning

graphically. Nor is it obvious, that such an invention†a has to be worthless.
Perhaps it spurs others to a different sort of work.--So while these others make
preparations, a long time in advance as it were, for building an aeroplane that
really flies, the former occupies himself with dreaming what this aeroplane has to
look like & what it will be capable of. This so far says nothing about the value of
these activities. The dreamer's may be worthless--& so may the others. MS 132

Madness doesn't have to be regarded as an illness. Why not as a sudden--more or
less sudden--change of character?

Everybody is (or most are) mistrustful, & perhaps more so towards their relations,
than towards others. Is their any reason for mistrust? Yes & no. Reasons can be
given for it, but they are not compelling. Why shouldn't someone suddenly
become much more mistrustful of people? Why not much more withdrawn? or
devoid of love? Don't people get like this even in the ordinary course of
events?--Where is the line to be drawn here between will & ability? Is it that I will
not open my heart to anyone any longer, or that I cannot? If so much can lose its
attraction, why not everything? If someone is wary even in ordinary life, why
shouldn't he--& perhaps suddenly--become much more wary? And much more
inaccessible. MS 133 2: 23.10.1946

The lesson in a poem is overstated, if the intellectual points are nakedly exposed,
not clothed by the heart. MS 133 6: 24.10.1946

Oh a key can†38 lie for ever where the locksmith placed it, & never be used to
open†b the lock for which the master forged it. MS 133 12: 24.10.1946

=== p. 81 ===

"It is high time for us to compare this phenomenon†c with something
different"--one may say.--I am thinking, e.g. of mental illnesses. MS 133 18:

Freud's fanciful pseudo-explanations (just because they are so brilliant) performed
a disservice.

(Now every ass has them†a within reach for 'explaining' symptoms of illness with
their help.) MS 133 21: 31.10.1946

Irony in music. E.g. Wagner in the Mastersingers. Incomparably deeper in the first
movement of the IXth in the fugato. Here is something, that corresponds to the
expression of bitter irony in speech.

I could equally well have said: the distorted in music. In the sense in which we
speak of features distorted by grief. When Grillparzer says Mozart countenanced
only the "beautiful" in music, that means, I think, that he did not countenance the
distorted, frightful, that there is nothing in his music corresponding to this. I am
not saying that is quite true; but assuming it to be so, it is a prejudice on
Grillparzer's part, to think that by rights it ought not to be otherwise. The fact that
music since Mozart (of course especially through Beethoven) has extended the
range of its language is to be neither commended nor deplored, rather: that's how
it is.†b Grillparzer's attitude involves a certain ingratitude. Did he want another
Mozart? Could he imagine something†39 that such a being might compose? Would
he have been able to imagine Mozart if he had not known him?

The concept of "the beautiful" has done a lot of mischief here too.

Concepts may alleviate mischief or make it worse; foster it or check it. MS 133
30: 1.-2.11.1946

The fundamental insecurity of life. Misery, everywhere you look.

=== p. 82 ===

The grinning faces of idiots may, it is true, make us think they do not really suffer;
but they do, only not in the same place as the more intelligent. They do not have,
as one might say, headache, but as much other wretchedness as anyone else. Not
all wretchedness need after all evoke the same facial expression. A nobler person
who suffers will look different from me. MS 133 68 c: 12.11.1946*

I cannot kneel to pray, because it's as though my knees were stiff. I am afraid of
dissolution (of my own dissolution) should I become soft. MS 133 82: 24.11.1946

I am showing my pupils sections of an immense landscape, which they cannot
possibly find their way around. MS 133 82: 24.11.1946

The truly apocalyptic view of the world is that things do not repeat themselves. It
is not e.g. absurd to believe that the scientific & technological age is the beginning
of the end for humanity, that the idea of Great Progress is a bedazzlement, along
with the idea that the truth will ultimately be known; that there is nothing good or
desirable about scientific knowledge & that humanity, in seeking it, is falling into a
trap. It is by no means clear that this is not how things are. MS 133 90: 7.1.1947

A man's dreams are virtually never realized. MS 133 118: 19.1.1947

Socrates, who always reduces the Sophist to silence--does he reduce him to
silence rightfully?--It's true, the Sophist does not know what he thinks he knows;
but that is no triumph for Socrates. It can neither be a case of "You see! You don't
know it!"--nor, triumphantly, "So none of us knows anything!"

Because I don't want to think just to convict myself, or even someone else, of
unclarity I am not trying to understand something,†a simply in order to see that I
still do not understand it. MS 133 188: 27.2.1947*

Wisdom is something cold, & to that extent foolish. (Faith, on the other hand, a
passion.) We might also say: wisdom merely conceals life from you. (Wisdom is
like cold, grey ash covering the glowing embers.) MS 134 9: 3.3.1947

=== p. 83 ===

Don't for heaven's sake, be afraid of talking nonsense! Only don't fail to pay
attention to your nonsense. MS 134 20: 5.3.1947

The miracles of nature,

We might say: art discloses the miracles of nature to us. It is based on the concept
of the miracles of nature. (The blossom, just opening out. What is marvellous
about it?) We say: "Look, how it's opening out!"

It could only be by accident that someone's dreams about the future of

philosophy, art, science would come true. What he sees is a continuation of his
own world in his dream, that is to say PERHAPS his wish (and perhaps not) but
not reality.

It might still happen that a person's photograph, e.g., changed with time, almost as
if he were aging on it. But its changes then take place according to their own laws
& why should they lead in a parallel direction to the development of the real
person?

The mathematician too can of course marvel at the miracles (the crystal) of
nature; but can he do it, once a problem has arisen about what he sees?†a Is it
really possible as long as the object he finds awe-inspiring or gazes at with awe is
shrouded in a philosophical fog?
I could imagine someone admiring trees, & also the shadows, or reflections of
trees, which he mistakes for trees. But if he should once tell himself that these†b
are not after all trees & if it becomes a problem for him what they are, or what
relation they have to trees, then his admiration will have suffered a rupture, that
will now need healing. MS 134 27: 10.-15.3.1947*

Sometimes a sentence can be understood only if it is read at the right tempo. My
sentences are all to be read slowly. MS 134 76: 28.3.1947

=== p. 84 ===

The 'necessity' with which the second idea succeeds the first. (Overture to Figaro.)
Nothing could be more idiotic than to say it's 'pleasing' to hear the second after
the first!--But the paradigm according to which everything there is right is
certainly obscure. 'It is the natural development.' You gesture with your hand,
would like to say: "of course!"--You could too compare the transition to a
transition (the entry of a new character) in a story, e.g., or a poem. That is how
this piece fits into the world of our thoughts & feelings. MS 134 78: 30.3.1947

The folds of my heart all the time tend to stick together & to open it I should need
to keep tearing them apart. MS 134 80 30.3.1947

A foolish & naïve American film can in all its foolishness & by means of it be
instructive. A fatuous, non-naïve†c English film can teach nothing. I have

often drawn a lesson from a foolish American film. MS 134 89: 2.4.1947

Is what I am doing in any way worth the effort? Well only, if it receives a light
from above. And if that happens,--why should I take care, not to be robbed of the
fruits of my labour? If what I write really has value, how were anyone to steal the
value from me? If the light from above is lacking, then I can in any case be no
more than clever. MS 134 95: 3.4.1947

I completely understand, how someone may hate it, if the priority of his invention
or discovery is called in question, how†a he may be willing to defend†b this
priority with tooth & claw. And yet it is only a chimera. To be sure it seems to me
too cheap, all too easy for Claudius to scoff at the priority disputes between
Newton & Leibniz; but I think it is true all the same that this quarrel springs only
from vile weaknesses & is nourished by VILE people. What would Newton have
lost if he had acknowledged Leibniz's originality? Absolutely nothing! He would
have gained a lot. And yet, how hard is such an acknowledgement, seeming,†c to
someone who attempts it, like a confession of his own incapacity. Only people
who esteem one, & at the same time love one, can make such behaviour†d easy
for one.†e

=== p. 85 ===

It's a question of envy of course. And anyone who feels it, ought to keep saying to
himself: 'It's a mistake! It's a mistake!--" MS 134 100: 4.4.1947

In the train of every idea that costs a lot come a host of cheap ones: amongst them
even a few that are useful.

Sometimes one sees ideas, as an astronomer sees stars in the far distance. (Or at
least it seems so.) MS 134 105: 5.4.1947

If I had written a good sentence, & they were by accident two rhyming
lines,†f†g†h this would be a blemish.

There is much that could be learned from Tolstoy's false†a theorizing that the work
of art conveys 'a feeling'.--And you really might call it, if not the expression of a
feeling, an expression of feeling, or a felt expression. And you might say too that
people who understand it to that extent 'resonate' with it, respond to it. You might
say: The work of art does not seek to convey something else, just itself. As, if I
pay someone a visit, I don't wish simply to produce such & such feelings in him,
but above all to pay him a visit, & naturally I also want to be well received.

And it does start to be really absurd, to say, the artist wishes that, what he feels
when writing, the other should feel when reading. Presumably I can think I
understand a poem (e.g.), understand it in the way its author would wish,--but
what he may have felt in writing it, that doesn't concern me at all. MS 134 106:

Just as I cannot write verse, so too I can write prose only up to a certain point, &
no further. There is a quite definite limit to my prose, & I can no more overstep it,
than I would be able to write a poem. This is how my equipment is constituted; it
is the only equipment available to me. It is like someone's saying: In this game I
can attain only this level of perfection, & not that. MS 134 108: 5.4.1947

It is possible†b, that everyone who executes an important work, sees before his
mind's eye, dreams of, a continuation of, a sequel to, his work; but it would be

=== p. 86 ===

remarkable all the same if it really turned out as he dreamed. Nowadays not
believing in your own dreams is of course easy. MS 134 120: 7.4.1947

Nietzsche writes somewhere,†40 that even the best poets & thinkers have written
mediocre & bad stuff, but have just separated off the good. But it is not quite like
that. It's true that along with the roses a gardener has manure & sweepings &
straw in his garden, but they are distinguished not only†c by value, but above all
too by†d function in the garden.

What looks like a bad sentence can be the germ of a good one. MS 134 124:

The faculty of 'taste' cannot create a new organism, only rectify one that is already
there. Taste loosens screws & tightens screws, it doesn't create a new original
work.†41

Taste rectifies, it doesn't give birth.†a

Taste makes ACCEPTABLE.

(Hence, I think, a great creator needs no†b taste: the child is born into the world
well formed.)

Polishing is sometimes the job of taste, sometimes not.

I have taste.

The†c most refined taste has nothing to do with creative power.

Taste is refinement of sensibility; but sensibility does not act, it merely assimilates.

=== p. 87 ===

I cannot†d judge whether I have only taste, or originality as well. The former I can
see distinctly, but not the latter, or only quite indistinctly. And perhaps it has to be
like that, & you see only what you have, not what you are. Someone who does not
lie is original enough. For, after all, the originality that would be worth wishing for,
cannot be a sort of trick, or an idiosyncracy, however marked.

In fact it is already a seed of good originality not to want to be what you are not.
And all that has been said before much better by others.

Taste can delight, but not seize. MS 134 129: 9.4.1947

You can as it were restore an old style in a new†e language; perform it afresh so to
speak in a manner†f that†g suits our times. In doing so you really only reproduce.
I have done this in my building work.

What I mean is not however giving an old style a new trim. You don't take the old
forms & fix them up to suit today's taste. No, you are really†a speaking, maybe
unconsciously, the old language, but speaking it in a manner that belongs to the
newer world, though not on that account necessarily one that is to its taste. MS

Someone reacts like this: he says "Not that!"--& resists it. Out of this situations
perhaps develop which are equally intolerable; & perhaps by then strength for any
further revolt is exhausted. We say "If he hadn't done that, the evil would not have
come about." But with what justification? Who knows the laws according to
which society unfolds? I am sure even the cleverest has no idea. If you fight, you
fight. If you hope, you hope.
Someone can fight, hope & even believe, without believing scientifically.

Science: enrichment & impoverishment. The one method elbows all others aside.
Compared with this they all seem paltry, preliminary stages at best. You must
climb down to the sources to see them all side by side, the disregarded & the
preferred. MS 134 141: 13.4.1947

=== p. 88 ===

Is it just I who cannot found a school, or can a philosopher never do so? I cannot
found a school, because I actually want not to be imitated.†i In any case not by
those who publish articles in philosophical journals.

The use of the word "fate". Our attitude to the future & the past. To what extent
do we hold ourselves responsible for the future? How much do we speculate about
the future? How do we think about past & future? If something unwelcome
happens:--do we ask "Who's to blame?", do we say "Someone must be to blame
for it"?,--or do we say "It was God's will", "It was fate"?

In the way in which asking a question, insisting on an answer, or not asking it,
expresses a different attitude, a different way of living, so too, in this sense, an
utterance like "It is God's will" or "We are not masters of our fate". What this
sentence does, or at least something similar, a commandment

too could do. Including one that you give to yourself. And conversely a
commandment, e.g. "Do not grumble!" can be uttered like the affirmation of a
truth.

Now why am I so anxious to keep apart these ways of using "declarative
sentences"? Is it really necessary? Did people in former times really not properly
understand what they wanted to do with a sentence? Is it pedantry?--It is simply
an attempt to see that every usage gets its due. Perhaps then a reaction against the
overestimation of science. The use of the word "science"†i for "everything that
can be said without nonsense" already betrays this over-estimation. For this
amounts in reality to dividing utterances into two classes: good & bad; & the
danger is already there. It is similar to dividing all animals, plants & rocks into the
useful & the harmful.

But of course the words "see that they get their due" & "overestimation" express
my point of view. I could have said instead: "I want to help this & this to regain
respect."; only I don't see it like that.

Fate is the antithesis of natural law. A natural law is something you try to fathom,
& make use of, fate is not.

=== p. 89 ===

It is not by any means clear to me, that I wish for a continuation of my work by
others, more than a change in the way we live, making all these questions
superfluous. (For this reason I could never found a school.)

The philosopher says "Look at things like this!"--but first, that is not to say that
people will look at things like this, second, he may be altogether too late with his
admonition, & it's possible too that such an admonition can achieve absolutely
nothing & that the impulse towards such a change in the way things are perceived
must come from another direction. For instance it is quite unclear whether Bacon
started anything moving, except the surface of his readers' minds.

Nothing seems to me more unlikely than that a scientist or mathematician, who
reads me, should be seriously influenced thereby in the way he works. (In that
respect my warnings†a are like the posters on the ticket offices at English railway
stations†42 "Is your journey really necessary?" As if anyone

reading that would say to himself "On second thoughts, no"†i.) Quite different
artillery is needed here from anything I am in a position to muster. Most likely I
could still achieve an effect in that, above all, a whole lot of garbage is written in
response to†a my stimulus & that perhaps this provides†b the stimulus for
something good. I ought always to hope only for the most indirect of influences.

E.g. nothing more stupid than the chatter about cause & effect in history books;
nothing more wrong-headed, more half-baked.--But who could put a stop to it by
saying that? (It is†c as though I wanted to change men's and women's fashions†d
by talking.) MS 134 143: 13.-14.4.1947

Think about how it was said of Labor's playing "He is speaking". How curious!
What was it about this playing that was so reminiscent of speaking? And how
remarkable that this†e similarity with speaking is not something we find incidental,
but an important & big matter!--We should like to call music, & certainly some
music, a language; but no doubt not some music.†f (Not that this need involve a
judgement of value!) MS 134 156: 11.5.1947

=== p. 90 ===

The book is full of life--not like a human being, but like an ant-heap. MS 134 157:

One keeps forgetting to go down to the foundations. One doesn't put the question
marks deep enough down.

The labour pains at the birth of new concepts. MS 134 180: 27.6.1947

"Wisdom is grey." Life on the other hand & religion are full of colour. MS 134

It may be that science & industry, & their progress, are the most enduring thing in
the world today. That any guess at a coming collapse of science & industry
were†a for now, & for a long time to come, simply a dream, & that science &
industry after†43 & with infinite misery will unite the world, I mean integrate it
into a single empire, in which†i to be sure peace is the last thing that will then find
a home.

For science & industry do decide wars, or so it seems. MS 135 14: 14.7.1947

Do not interest yourself in what, presumably, only you are doing! MS 135 23:

My thoughts probably move in a far narrower circle than I suspect! MS 135 85:

Thoughts rise to the surface slowly, like bubbles.

=== p. 91 ===

Sometimes it's as though you could see a thought, an idea, as an indistinct point far
away on the horizon; & then it often comes closer†b with surprising speed. MS

Where there is bad management in the state, I believe, bad management is
fostered in families too. A worker who is ready for a strike†44 at any time will not
bring up his children to respect order either. MS 135 102: 27.7.1947

God grant the philosopher insight into what lies in front of everyone's eyes. MS
135 103 c: 27.7.1947

Life is like a path along a mountain ridge; right & left smooth†c slopes down
which you slide in this or that†d direction without being able to stop yourself. I
keep seeing people slip like this & I say: "How could anyone help himself in that
situation!" And that is what "denying free will" comes to. That is the attitude that
expresses itself in this 'belief'. But it is not a scientific belief, has nothing to do
with scientific convictions.

Denying responsibility means, not holding anyone responsible. MS 135 110:

Some people have a taste that is related to an educated taste as is the visual
impression of a purblind eye to that of a normal eye. Where a normal eye see clear
articulation, the weak one sees blurred patches of colour. MS 135 133: 2.8.1947

Someone who knows too much finds it hard not to lie. MS 135 191: 17.12.1947

I am so afraid of someone's playing the piano in the house that, when it happens &
the strumming has stopped, I still have a sort of hallucination, that it's continuing. I
can hear it then quite clearly, although I know that it is all in my imagination. MS

=== p. 92 ===

It appears to me as though a religious belief could only be (something like)
passionately committing oneself to a system of coordinates†a. Hence although it's
belief, it is really a way of living, or a way of judging life. Passionately taking up
this interpretation. And so instructing in a religious belief would have to be
portraying, describing that system of reference & at the same time appealing to
the conscience. And these together would have to result finally in the one under
instruction himself, of his own accord, passionately taking up that system of
reference. It would be as though someone were on the one hand to let me see my
hopeless situation, on the other depict the rescue-anchor†b, until of my own
accord, or at any rate not†c†d led by the hand by the instructor, I were to rush up
& seize it.†45 MS 136 16b: 21.12.1947

Perhaps one day a culture will arise out of this civilization.

Then there will be a real history of the discoveries of the 18th, 19th & 20th
centuries, which will be of profound interest. MS 136 18b: 21.12.1947

In the course of a scientific investigation we say all kinds of things; we make
many utterances the role of which in our investigation we do not

understand. For of course not everything we say has a conscious purpose, but our
tongues just keep going. Our thoughts run in established routines, we make,
automatically, transitions†a according to the techniques†b we have learned. And
now comes the time for us to survey what we have said. We have made a whole
lot of movements that do not further our purpose, even impede it, and now we
have to clarify our thought processes philosophically. MS 136 31a: 24.12.1947

It seems to me I am still a long way from understanding these things; from the
point, that is, at which I know what I have to talk about, & what I don't need to
talk about. I still keep getting entangled in details without knowing whether I
ought to be talking about such things at all; & I have the impression that I may be
inspecting a large area, simply to exclude it eventually from consideration. But
even in this case these reflections would not be worthless; as long, that is, as they
are not just going round in a circle. MS 136 37a: 25.12.1947

=== p. 93 ===

Architecture glorifies something (because it endures).†c It glorifies its purpose.

(...)

Architecture immortalizes & glorifies something. Hence there can be no
architecture where there is nothing (to immortalize &) glorify.

(...)

Architecture immortalizes & glorifies something. Hence there can be no
architecture where there is nothing to glorify.

Architecture glorifies something (because it endures). Hence there can be no
architecture where there is nothing to glorify. MS 167 10v: ca. 1947-1948

When philosophizing you have to descend into the old chaos†i & feel at home
there. MS 136 51a: 3.1.1948

Genius is talent in which character makes itself heard. For that reason, I would
like to say, Kraus has talent, an extraordinary talent, but not genius.

To be sure, there are flashes of genius where, despite the great application of
talent, you do not notice the talent. Example: "For the ox & the ass can do things
too..."†46 It is curious that this e.g. is so much greater than anything Kraus ever
wrote. Here you see not merely an intellectual skeleton, but a whole human being.

That is the reason too why the greatness of what someone writes depends on
everything else he writes & does. MS 136 59a: 4.1.1948

=== p. 94 ===

In a dream, & even long after we wake up, dream words can seem to us to have
the greatest significance. Isn't the same illusion possible too in waking life? It
seems to me as though I am sometimes subject to it these days. It often appears to
be like this with the insane. MS 136 60b: 4.1.1948

What I am writing here may be feeble stuff; well, in that case I am just not
capable of getting out the big, important thing. But there are great prospects
hidden in these feeble remarks. MS 136 62a: 4.1.1948

Schiller writes in a letter (to Goethe, I think)†47 of a 'poetic mood'. I think I know
what he means, I think I am familiar with it myself. It is the mood of receptivity to
nature & one in which one's thoughts seem as vivid as nature itself. But it is
strange that Schiller did not produce anything better (or so it seems to me) & so I
am furthermore not entirely convinced that what I produce in such a mood is
worth anything. It is quite possible that what gives my thoughts their lustre on
such occasions is a light that they receive from behind them. That they do not
themselves glow.

Where others go on ahead, I remain standing. MS 136 80a: 8.1.1948

[For the Foreword.]†48 It is not without†a reluctance that I offer the book to the
public. The hands into which it will fall are for the most part not those in which I
like to imagine it. May it soon--this is what I wish for it--be completely forgotten
by the philosophical journalists & thus perhaps be kept for a more upright†b kind
of reader. MS 136 81a: 8.1.1948

Only every so often does one of the sentences I am writing here make a step
forward; the rest are like the snipping of the barber's scissors, which he has to
keep in motion so as to be able to make a cut with them at the right moment. MS

As I again & again come across questions in more remote regions that I cannot
answer, it becomes clear†a why I still cannot find my way round regions that are
less remote. For how do I know that what stands in the way of an answer here is

=== p. 95 ===

not precisely what prevents me from clearing away the fog over there? MS 136
89a: 10.1.1948

Raisins may be the best part of a cake; but a bag of raisins is not better than a
cake; & someone who is in a position to give us a bag full of raisins still cannot
bake a cake with them, let alone do something better.

I am thinking of Kraus & his aphorisms, but of myself too & my philosophical
remarks.

A cake is not as it were: thinned out raisins. MS 136 91b: 11.1.1948

Colours are a stimulus to philosophizing. Perhaps that explains Goethe's passion
for the theory of colours.

Colours seem to present us with a riddle, a riddle that stimulates us,--not one that
exasperates†i us. MS 136 92b: 11.1.1948

Human beings can regard all the evil within them as blindness. MS 136 107a:

If it is true, as I believe, that Mahler's music is worthless, the question is what I
think he should have done with his talent. For quite obviously it took a string of
very rare talents to produce this bad music. Should he, say, have written his
symphonies & burnt them? Or should he have done himself violence & not have
written them? Should he have written them & realized that they were worthless?
But how could he have realized that? I see it because I can compare his music
with that of the great composers. But he could not do that; for someone to whom
that has occurred may perhaps have misgivings about the value of his production,
because he no doubt sees that he does not, so to speak, have the nature of the
other great

composers,--but that does not mean that he will grasp the worthlessness; because
he can always tell himself that he is, it is true, different from the rest (whom
however he admires) but excellent in another way. We could perhaps say: If
nobody whom you admire is like you, then presumably you believe in your own

=== p. 96 ===

value only because you are you.--Even someone who struggles against vanity, but
not entirely successfully, will always deceive himself about the value of what he
produces.

But what seems most dangerous is to put your work into the position of being
compared, first by yourself & then by others, with the great works of former
times. You should not entertain such a comparison at all. For if today's
circumstances are really so different, from what they once were, that you cannot
compare your work with earlier works in respect of its genre, then you equally
cannot compare its value with that of the other work. I myself am constantly
making the mistake under discussion.

Incorruptibility is everything!

Conglomeration: national sentiment, e.g. MS 136 110b: 14.1.1948*

Animals come when their names are called. Just like human beings. MS 136 113a:

I ask countless irrelevant questions. If only I can beat my way through this forest!

Really I want to slow down the speed of reading with continual†a punctuation
marks. For I should like to be read slowly. (As I myself read.) MS 136 128b:

I think Bacon got bogged down in his philosophy & this danger threatens me too.
He had a vivid image of a huge building, it disappeared however when he really
wanted to get down to details. It was as though his contemporaries had begun to
build a great building from the foundations; & as though he had seen something
similar in his imagination, the vision of such a building; had seen it as even more
imposing than, perhaps, those who were working on the construction. For this an
inkling of the method was necessary, but by no means a talent for building work.
But the bad

=== p. 97 ===

thing was that he launched polemical attacks against the real builders & either did
not recognize, or did not want to recognize, his limitations.

On the other hand it is tremendously hard to see these limitations, & that means,
to delineate them clearly. That is, as it were, to find†a a way of painting to depict
this fuzziness. For I want to keep saying to myself: "Paint nothing more than what
you see!" MS 136 129b: 19.1.1948

In Freudian analysis the dream is as it were dismantled. It loses its original sense
completely. You might think of it as performed on the stage, with a plot that is
sometimes fairly incomprehensible but also in part quite comprehensible, or at
least apparently so, & as though this plot were then torn into little pieces & each
part given a completely different meaning. You could also think of it like this: a
picture is drawn on a big sheet of paper & the sheet is then folded in such a way
that pieces which do not belong together at all in the original picture collide in
appearance & a new picture, which may make sense or may not, is formed (this
would be the manifest dream, the first picture the 'latent dream thought').

Now I could imagine that someone, who sees the unfolded picture, might exclaim
"Yes, that is the solution, that is what I dreamed, but without gaps & distortions."
It would then be this acknowledgement that made this solution the solution. Just
as, if you are searching for a word while writing & then say: "That's it, that says
what I wanted to say!"--Your acknowledgement stamps the word as having been
found, i.e. the one you were looking for. (In this case it might really be said: only
when you have found it, do you know what you were looking for--much as Russell
said about wishing.)

What is intriguing about a dream, is not its causal connection with events in my
life, etc., but rather this, that it affects us like part of a story,†b & indeed a very
vivid part, the rest lying in darkness. (We would like to say†c: "Where on earth
did this image come from, & what has become of it?") Yes, and if someone now
shows me that this story was not the right story; that in reality quite a different one
underlay it, so that I want to say†d, disenchanted, "Oh, that's how it was?", I have
seemingly really been robbed of something. Certainly, the first story now
disintegrates, as the paper is unfolded; the man I saw was taken from here, his
words from

there, the surroundings in the dream from somewhere else again; but the dream
story all the same has its own charm, like a painting that attracts & inspires us.

=== p. 98 ===

It can certainly be said that we contemplate the dream picture with inspiration,
that we just are inspired. For if we tell the dream to someone else, the picture
usually does not inspire him. The dream is like an idea pregnant with possible
implications†a MS 136 137a: 22.1.1948

Strike a coin from every mistake. MS 137 17a: 10.2.1948

Understanding & explaining a musical phrase.--The simplest explanation is
sometimes a gesture; another might be a dance step, or words describing a
dance.--But isn't our understanding of the phrase an experience we have while
hearing it? & what function, in that case, has the explanation? Are we supposed to
think of it while we hear the music? Are we supposed to imagine the dance, or
whatever it may be, as we listen? And supposing we do,--why should that be
called hearing the music with understanding?? If seeing the dance is what matters,
it would be better that, rather than the music, were performed. But that is all a
misunderstanding.

I give someone an explanation, say to him: "It's as though..."; then he says "Yes
now I understand it" or "Yes now I know how it is to be played". Above all he did
not have to accept the explanation; it is not after all as though I had given him
compelling reasons for comparing this passage with this & that. I did not e.g.
explain to him that remarks made by the composer show that this passage is
supposed to represent this & that.

If I now ask "What do I actually experience then, if I hear the theme & hear it
with understanding?"--nothing but inanities†b occur to me by way of reply. Such
as images, kinaesthetic sensations, thoughts†c and the like.
Sure enough I say "I go along with it"--but what does that mean? It might mean
roughly that I accompany the music with gestures. And if we point out that after
all this happens for the most part only in very rudimentary measure, we shall
perhaps receive the answer that the rudimentary movements are supplemented
with images. But let us nevertheless assume that someone does accompany the
music with movements in full

measure,--in what sense does that amount to understanding it? And do I want to
say, the movements are the understanding; or his kinaesthetic sensations? (What
do I know about them?)--What is true is, that, in certain circumstances, I shall

=== p. 99 ===

regard his movements as signs of his understanding.

But am I to say (if I reject images, kinaesthetic sensations, etc. as an explanation)
that understanding is just a specific experience that cannot be analysed further?
Well, that would be passable, as long as it is not supposed to mean,†a it is a
specific experiential content. For these words make one think of distinctions like
those between seeing, hearing & smelling.†b

How then do we explain to someone what it means "to understand music"? By
naming the images, kinaesthetic sensations, etc. experienced by someone who
understands? More likely, by pointing out the expressive movements of one who
understands.--Anyway, there is also the question, what function does explanation
have here? & what does it mean: to understand what it means to understand
music? Some indeed would say: to understand that means: to understand music
oneself. And so the question would be "Then can we teach someone to understand
music", for only that kind of teaching could be called an explanation of music.

Appreciation†c of music is expressed in a certain way, both in the course of
hearing & playing and at other times†d too. This expression sometimes includes
movements, but sometimes only the way the one who understands plays, or hums,
occasionally too parallels he draws & images which, as it were, illustrate the
music. Someone who understands music will listen differently (with a different
facial expression, e.g.), play differently, hum differently, talk differently about the
piece than someone who does not understand. His appreciation of a theme will not
however be shown only in phenomena that accompany the hearing or playing of
the theme, but also in an appreciation for music in general.

Appreciating music is a manifestation of human life. How could it be described to
someone? Well, above all I suppose we should have to describe music. Then we
could describe the relation human beings have to it. But is that all that is
necessary, or is it also part of the process to teach

him to appreciate it for himself? Well, developing his appreciation will teach him
what appreciation is in a different sense, than a teaching†a that does not do this.
And again, teaching him to appreciate poetry or painting can be part of an
explanation of what music is. MS 137 20b: 15.2.1948

=== p. 100 ===

Our children learn in school already that water consists of the gases hydrogen &
oxygen, or sugar of carbon, hydrogen & oxygen. Anyone who does not
understand is stupid. The most important questions are concealed. MS 137 30b:

The beauty of a star-shaped figure--of a hexagonal star perhaps--is spoiled if we
see it as symmetrical relative to a given axis. MS 137 34b: 10.3.1948

Bach said that everything he achieved was the result of industry. But industry like
that presupposes humility & an enormous capacity for suffering, strength then.
And anyone who in addition can express himself perfectly, simply addresses us in
the language of a great human being. MS 137 40b: 28.5.1948

I think that present day education of human beings†49 aims at decreasing the
capacity for suffering. Nowadays a school counts as good, if the children have a
Good time. And formerly that was not the yardstick. And parents would like
children to become the way they themselves are (only more so) & yet they give
them an education which is quite different from their own.--Capacity for suffering
is not rated highly, since there are not supposed to be any sufferings, really they
are out of date.

"The cussedness of things"†i--An unnecessary anthropomorphism. We might
speak of a malice of the world; easily imagine the devil created the

world, or part of it. And we need not imagine the demon intervening in particular
situations; everything may happen 'in accordance with the laws of nature': it is just
that the whole plan is directed at evil from the start. But a human being exists in
this world in which things break, slide about, cause every possible mischief. And
of course he†a is one of the things.--The 'malice' of the object is a stupid
anthropomorphism. For the truth is much graver than this fiction. MS 137 42a:

A stylistic device may be useful & yet I may be barred from using it.
Schopenhauer's "as which" e.g. It would sometimes make for much more

=== p. 101 ===

comfortable, clearer expression, but cannot be used by someone who perceives it
as archaic; & he must not disregard this perception†b. MS 137 43a: 30.5.1948

Religious faith & superstition are quite different. The one springs from fear & is a
sort of false science. The other is a trusting. MS 137 48b: 4.6.1948

It would almost be strange if there did not exist animals with the mental life of
plants. I.e. lacking mental life. MS 137 49a: 4.6.1948

I think it might be regarded as a fundamental law of natural history that, whenever
something in nature 'has a function', 'serves a purpose', the same thing also occurs
in circumstances where it serves none, is even 'dysfunctional'.

If dreams sometimes protect sleep, you can count on their sometimes disturbing it;
if dream hallucination sometimes serves a plausible end (imagined†c wish
fulfilment), count on its doing the opposite as well. There is no 'dynamic theory of
dreams'. MS 137 49b: 4.6.1948

What is important about depicting anomalies precisely? If you cannot do it, that†d
shows you do not know your way around the concepts. MS 137 51a: 15.6.1948

I am too soft, too weak, & so too lazy, to achieve anything important. The
industry of the great is, amongst other things, a sign of their strength, quite apart
from their inner wealth. MS 137 54b: 25.6.1948

If God really does choose those who are to be saved, there is no reason why he
should not choose them according to their nationalities, races, or temperaments.
Why the choice should not be expressed in the laws of nature. (He was of course
also able so to choose, that the choice follows a law.)

I have been reading extracts from the writings of St. John of the Cross†50, in
which it is written that people have gone to their ruin, because they did not have
the good fortune to find a wise spiritual director at the right moment.

=== p. 102 ===

And how can you†a say then that God does not try people beyond their strengths?

I am inclined to say here, it is true, that crooked concepts have done a lot of
mischief, but the truth is, that I do not know at all, what does good & what does
mischief. MS 137 57a: 26.6.1948

We must not forget: even our more refined, more philosophical, scruples have a
foundation in instinct. E.g. the 'We can never know...' Remaining receptive to
further arguments. People who couldn't be taught this would strike us as mentally
inferior. Still incapable of forming a certain concept. MS 137 57b: 30.6.1948

If the dreams of sleep have a similar function to daydreams, then they partly serve
<to> prepare people for any eventuality (including the worst). MS 137 65b:

If someone can believe in God with complete certainty, why not in Other Minds?

This musical phrase is a gesture for me. It creeps into my life. I make it my own.

Life's infinite variations are an essential part of our life. And so precisely of the
habitual character of life. Expression consists for us <in> incalculability. If I knew
exactly how he would grimace, move, there would be no facial expression, no
gesture.--But is that true?--I can after all listen again

& again to a piece of music that I know (completely) by heart; & it could even be
played on†a a musical box. Its gestures would still remain gestures for me
although I know all the time, what comes next. Indeed I may even be surprised
afresh again & again. (In a certain sense.) MS 137 67a: 4.7.1948

The honest religious thinker is like a tightrope walker. It almost looks as though he
were walking on nothing but air. His support†b†i is the slenderest imaginable. And

=== p. 103 ===

yet it really is possible to walk on it. MS 137 67b: 5.7.1948

Unshakable faith. (E.g. in a promise.) Is it less certain than being convinced of a
mathematical truth?--(But does that make the language games any more alike!)
MS 137 70b: 7.7.1948

It is important for our approach, that someone may feel concerning certain people,
that he will never know what goes on inside them. He will never understand them.
(Englishwomen for Europeans.) MS 137 71a: 9.7.1948

I think it is an important & remarkable fact, that a musical theme, if it is played
<at> (very) different tempi, changes its character. Transition from quantity to
quality. MS 137 72b: 14.7.1948

The problems of life are insoluble on the surface, & can only be solved in depth.
In surface dimensions they are insoluble. MS 137: 73b: 25.7.1948

In a conversation: One person throws a ball; the other does not know: is he to
throw it back, throw it to a third person, or leave it lying, or pick it up & put it in
his pocket, etc.. MS 137 75b: 23.8.1948

A great architect in a bad period (Van der Nüll) has a quite different task from that
of a great architect in a good period. You must again not let yourself be
deceived†c by the generic term. Don't take comparability, but rather
incomparability, as a matter of course. MS 137 76a: 19.10.1948

Nothing is more important though than the construction of fictional concepts,†a
which will teach us at last to understand our own. MS 137 78b: 24.10.1948

"Thinking is difficult." (Ward) What does that really mean? Why is it difficult?--It

=== p. 104 ===

is almost like saying "Looking is difficult". For looking intently is difficult. And
you may look intently & yet see nothing, or keep thinking you see something &
yet not be able to see clearly†b. You can tire from looking, even if you see
nothing. MS 137 81b: 27.10.1948

If you cannot unravel a tangle, the most sensible thing you can do†c is to
recognize this; & the most decent, to admit it. [Antisemitism.]

What you should do to cure the evil is not clear. What is not permissible is clear
from one case to another. MS 137 88a: 4.11.1948

It is remarkable that Busch's drawings can often be called 'metaphysical'. There is
then a way of drawing that is metaphysical.--"Seen, with the eternal as
background"†51 one might say. However these strokes mean this only in a whole
language. And it is a language without grammar, you couldn't say what its rules
are. MS 137 88b: 4.11.1948

When he was old Charlemagne tried unsuccessfully to learn to write: & someone
may be similarly unsuccessful in trying to learn a new line of thinking. He never
becomes fluent in it. MS 137 89b: 5.11.1948

A language, which is spoken in strict tempo, so that you can also speak according
to the metronome. It does not go without saying that music can be performed, like
ours, at least occasionally, to the metronome. (Playing the theme from the 8th
Symph.†52 exactly according to the metronome.) MS 137 97b: 14.11.1948

It would already be enough, that all members of a community had the same facial
features, for us not to be able to fathom them. MS 137 97b: 16.11.1948

If a false thought is so much as expressed boldly & clearly, a great deal has
already been gained. MS 137 100a: 19.11.1948

=== p. 105 ===

Only by thinking much more crazily even than the philosophers, can you solve
their problems. MS 137 102a: 20.11.1948

Imagine someone watching a pendulum & thinking: God makes it move like that.
Well, doesn't God have the right†a even to act in accordance with a calculation?

A writer far more talented than I would still have little talent. MS 137 104a:

Human beings have a physical need to tell themselves when at work: "Let's have
done with it now", & it's having constantly to go on thinking in the face of this
need when philosophizing, that makes this work so strenuous. MS 137 104b:

You must accept the faults in your own style. Almost like the blemishes in your
own face. MS 137 106b: 23.11.1948

Always come down from the barren heights of cleverness into the green valleys of
folly. MS 137 111b: 28.11.1948

I have one of those talents that has constantly to make a virtue out of necessity.

Tradition is not something that anyone†b can pick up†c, it's not a thread, that
someone can pick up, if & when he pleases; any more than you can choose your
own ancestors.†d

Someone who has no tradition & would like to have it, is like an unhappy lover.

The happy lover & the unhappy lover both have their particular pathos.

But it is harder to bear yourself well as an unhappy lover than as a happy one. MS

=== p. 106 ===

Moore poked into a philosophical wasp nest with his paradox; & if the wasps did
not duly fly out, that's only because they were too listless. MS 137 120a:

In the realm of the mind a project can usually not be begun again, nor should it be.
These thoughts fertilize the soil for fresh thoughts.†a MS 137 122a: 11.12.1948

Are you a bad philosopher then, if what you write is hard to understand. If you
were better, then you would make it easy to understand what is difficult.--But who
says that is possible?! [Tolstoy] MS 137 127a: 16.12.1948

The greatest happiness for a human being is love. Suppose you say of the
schizophrenic: he does not love, he cannot love, he refuses to love--where is the
difference?

"He refuses to..." means: it is in his power. And who wants to say that?!

Well, of what do we say "it is in his power"?--We say it in cases where we want to
draw a distinction. I can lift this weight, but I will not lift it; that weight I cannot
lift.

"God has commanded it, therefore we must be able to do it." That means nothing.
There is no "therefore" about it. The two expressions might at most mean the
same.

"He has commanded it" means here roughly: He will punish anyone who does not
do it. And nothing follows from that about being able. And that is the sense of
'election by grace'.

But that does not mean that it is right to say: "He punishes, although we cannot

=== p. 107 ===

act otherwise."--Perhaps, though, one might say: here there is punishment, where
punishment by human beings would be impermissible. And the whole concept of
'punishment' changes here. For the old illustrations can no longer be applied, or
now have to be applied quite differently. Just look at an allegory like "The
Pilgrim's Progress"†53 & see how nothing

--in human terms--is right.--But isn't it right all the same? i.e. can it not be applied?
Indeed, it has been applied. (At railway stations there are dials with two hands,
they indicate when the next train leaves. They look like clocks & aren't; but they
have a†a use.) (There should be a better comparison here.)

To someone who is upset by this†b allegory it might be said: Apply it differently or
don't bother with it! (But some will be far more confused than helped by it.) MS
137 130a: 22.12.1948

Anything the reader can do for himself, leave it to the reader. MS 137 134b:

Almost the whole time I am writing conversations with myself. Things I say to
myself tête-à-tête. MS 137 134b: 26.12.1948

Ambition is the death of thought. MS 137 135a: 27.12.1948

Humour is not a mood, but a way of looking at the world. So, if it's right to say
that humour was eradicated in Nazi Germany, that does not mean that people
were not in good spirits or anything of that sort, but something much deeper &
more important. MS 137 135a: 28.12.1948

Two people who are laughing together, at a joke perhaps. One of them has said†c
certain somewhat unusual words & now they both break out into a sort of
bleating. That might appear very bizarre to someone arriving among us from a
quite different background. Whereas we find it quite reasonable.

=== p. 108 ===

(I witnessed this scene recently on a bus & was able to think myself into the skin
of someone not accustomed to it. It struck me then as quite irrational & like the
reactions of an outlandish animal.) MS 137 136b: 31.12.1948

Recounting a dream, a medley of recollections. Often forming a significant &
enigmatic whole. As it were a fragment, that makes a powerful impression on us
(sometimes that is), so that we look for an explanation, for connections.

But why did these recollections come now? Who will say?--It may be connected
with our present life, and so too with our wishes, fears, etc. "But do you mean to
say that this phenomenon must exist in the particular causal interconnection?"--I
mean to say that it does not necessarily make sense to speak of discovering its
cause.

Shakespeare & the dream. A dream is all wrong, absurd, composite, & yet
completely right: in this strange concoction it makes an impression. Why? I don't
know. And if Shakespeare is great, as he is said to be, then we must be able to say
of him: Everything is wrong, things aren't like that--& is all the same completely
right according to a law of its own.
It could be put like this too: If Shakespeare is great, then he can be so only in the
whole corpus of his plays, which create their own language & world. So he is
completely unrealistic. (Like the dream.) MS 168 1r: January 1949

If Christianity is the truth, then all the philosophy about it is false. MS 169 58v:

Culture is an observance. Or at least presupposes an observance. MS 169 62v:

The concept of a 'festivity'. Connected for us with merrymaking; perhaps in
another age only with fear & dread. What we call "wit" & what we call "humour"

