=== chunk: wittgenstein-1998-culture-and-value/period-1949-1951 ===
title: Remarks 1949–1951 — final period
source_pdf: docs/sources/wittgenstein-1998-culture-and-value/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 108-119
page_scheme: pdf
plan_page_start: 108
plan_page_end: 119
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 108 ===

(I witnessed this scene recently on a bus & was able to think myself into the skin
of someone not accustomed to it. It struck me then as quite irrational & like the
reactions of an outlandish animal.) MS 137 136b: 31.12.1948

Recounting a dream, a medley of recollections. Often forming a significant &
enigmatic whole. As it were a fragment, that makes a powerful impression on us
(sometimes that is), so that we look for an explanation, for connections.

But why did these recollections come now? Who will say?--It may be connected
with our present life, and so too with our wishes, fears, etc. "But do you mean to
say that this phenomenon must exist in the particular causal interconnection?"--I
mean to say that it does not necessarily make sense to speak of discovering its
cause.

Shakespeare & the dream. A dream is all wrong, absurd, composite, & yet
completely right: in this strange concoction it makes an impression. Why? I don't
know. And if Shakespeare is great, as he is said to be, then we must be able to say
of him: Everything is wrong, things aren't like that--& is all the same completely
right according to a law of its own.
It could be put like this too: If Shakespeare is great, then he can be so only in the
whole corpus of his plays, which create their own language & world. So he is
completely unrealistic. (Like the dream.) MS 168 1r: January 1949

If Christianity is the truth, then all the philosophy about it is false. MS 169 58v:

Culture is an observance. Or at least presupposes an observance. MS 169 62v:

The concept of a 'festivity'. Connected for us with merrymaking; perhaps in
another age only with fear & dread. What we call "wit" & what we call "humour"

=== p. 109 ===

doubtless did not exist in other ages. And both these are perpetually†a
changing.†b MS 137 137a: 1.1.1949

"Le style c'est l'homme." "Le style c'est l'homme même." The first expression has
a cheap epigrammatic brevity. The second, correct, one opens up a quite different
perspective. It says that style is the picture of the man.

There are remarks that sow, & remarks that reap. MS 137 140a: 4.1.1949

To piece together†a the landscape of these conceptual relationships out of their
individual fragments†b is too difficult for me. I can make only a very imperfect
job of it. MS 137 141a: 6.1.1949

If I prepare myself for some eventuality, you can be pretty sure that it won't
happen. Perhaps.†i

It is difficult to know something, & to act as though you didn't know it. MS 137
143a: 7.-8.1.1949

There really are cases in which one†c has the sense of what one†d wants to say
much more clearly in mind than he†e†54 can express in words. (This happens to
me very often.) It is as though one remembered a dream very clearly, but could
not give a good account of it.†f Indeed the image often stays there behind the
words for the writer (me), so that they seem to describe it to me.

A mediocre writer must beware of too quickly replacing a crude, incorrect
expression with a correct one. By doing so he kills the original idea, which was
still at least a living seedling. And now it is shrivelled & no longer worth anything.
He may now just as well throw it on the rubbish heap. Whereas the pitiful seedling
still had a certain usefulness. MS 138 2a: 17.1.1949

=== p. 110 ===

That writers, who after all were something, go out of date is connected with the
fact that their writings, when complemented by the setting of their own age, speak
strongly to people, but that they die without this complementation, as if bereft of
the lighting that gave them colour.

And I believe that the beauty of mathematical demonstrations, as experienced by
Pascal too, is connected with this. Within this way of

looking at the world these demonstrations did have beauty--not what superficial
people call beauty. A crystal too is not beautiful in every 'setting'--though perhaps
everywhere attractive.--

The way whole periods are incapable of freeing themselves from the grip of
certain concepts--e.g. the concept 'beautiful' & 'beauty'. MS 138 3a: 18.1.1949

My own thinking about art & values is far more disillusioned, than would have
been possible for people 100 years ago. However that does not mean that it is
more correct on that account. It only means that there are examples of decline in
the forefront of my mind, which were not in the forefront for those people then.
MS 138 4a: 18.1.1949

Troubles are like illnesses; you have to put up with them: the worst thing you can
do is, rebel against them.

They come in attacks too, triggered by inner, or outer causes. And then you must
tell yourself: "Another attack". MS 138 4b: 19.1.1949

Scientific questions may interest me, but they never really grip†a me. Only
conceptual & aesthetic questions have that effect on me. At bottom it leaves me
cold whether scientific problems are solved; but not those other questions. MS 138

Even if we are not thinking in circles, still, we sometimes walk straight through the
thicket of questions out into the open country, sometimes†b along tortuous, or

=== p. 111 ===

zigzagging paths, which don't take us into the open country. MS 138 8a: 22.1.1949

The Sabbath is not simply a time to rest, to recuperate. We are supposed to look at
our work from the outside, not just from within. MS 138 8b: 23.1.1949

This is how philosophers should salute each other: "Take your time!" MS 138 9a:
24.1.1949

For a human being the eternal, the consequential is often hidden behind an
impenetrable veil. He knows: there is something under there, but he cannot see it;
the veil reflects the daylight. MS 138 9a: 24.1.1949

Why shouldn't someone become desperately unhappy? It is one human possibility.
As in 'Corinthian Bagatelle', this is one of the possible paths for the balls. And
perhaps not even one of the rarest. MS 138 9b: 25.1.1949

The valleys of foolishness have more grass growing in them for the philosopher
than do the barren heights of cleverness. MS 138 11a: 28.1.1949

Isochronism according to the clock & isochronism in music. They are by no means
equivalent concepts. Playing in strict time, does not mean playing exactly
according to the metronome. But it would be possible that a certain kind of music
should be played according to the metronome. (Is the opening theme <of the
second movement> of the 8th symphony of this kind?) MS 138 12a: 30.1.1949

Could the concept of the punishments of hell be explained in some other way than
by way of the concept of punishment? Or the concept of God's goodness in some
other way than by way of the concept of goodness?

If you want to achieve the right effect with your words, doubtless not.

=== p. 112 ===

Suppose someone were taught: There is a being who, if you do this & that, live in
such & such a way, will take you after your death to a place of eternal torment;
most people end up there, a few get to a place of eternal joy.--This being has
picked out in advance those who are to get to the good place; &, since only those
who have lived a certain sort of life get to the place of torment, he has also picked
out in advance those who are to lead that sort of life.

What might be the effect of such a doctrine?

Well, there is no mention of punishment here, but rather a kind of natural law.
And anyone to whom it is represented in such a light, could derive only despair or
incredulity from it.†a

Teaching this could not be an ethical training. And if you wanted to train anyone
ethically & yet teach him like this, you would have to teach the doctrine after the
ethical training, and represent it as a sort of incomprehensible mystery. MS 138

"He has chosen them, in his goodness, & you he will punish" really makes no
sense. The two halves belong to different kinds of perspective. The second half is
ethical & the first not. And taken together with the first the second is absurd. MS
138 14a: 2.2.1949

It is an accident that 'last' rhymes with 'fast'.†i But a lucky accident, & you can
discover†a this lucky accident. MS 138 25a: 25a: 22.2.1949

In Beethoven's music what one might call the expression of irony is to be found
for the first time. E.G. in the first movement of the Ninth. With him, moreover, it
is a terrible irony, that of fate perhaps.--In Wagner irony reappears, but turned into
something bourgeois.

You could no doubt say that Wagner & Brahms, each in his own way, imitated

=== p. 113 ===

Beethoven; but what with him was cosmic, is†b earthly with them.

The same expressions are to be found in him, but they follow different laws.

In Mozart's or Haydn's music again fate plays no sort of role. That is not the
concern of this music.

That ass Tovey says somewhere that this, or something similar, is connected with
the fact that Mozart has no access to literature of a certain sort. As though it were
established, that only books had made the music of the masters what it was.
Naturally, books & music are connected. But if Mozart found no great tragedy in
his reading, does that mean that he did not find it in his life? And do composers
always see solely through the spectacles of poets? MS 138 28a: 27.2.1949

Only in a quite particular musical context is there such a thing as three-part
counterpoint. MS 138 28b: 27.2.1949

Soulful expression in music. It is not to be described in terms of degrees of
loudness & of tempo. Any more than is a soulful facial expression describable in
terms of the distribution of matter in space. Indeed it is not even to be explained
by means of a paradigm, since the same piece can be played with genuine
expression in innumerable ways. MS 138 29a: 1.3.1949

God's essence is said to guarantee his existence--what this really means is that
here what is at issue is not the existence of something.

For could one not equally say that the essence of colour guarantees its existence?
As opposed, say, to the white elephant. For it really only means: I cannot explain
what 'colour' is, what the word "colour" means, without the help of a colour
sample. So in this case there is no such thing as explaining 'what it would be like if
colours were to exist'.

And now we might say: There can be a description of what it would be like if
there were gods on Olympus--but not: 'what it would be like if there were God'.

=== p. 114 ===

And this determines the concept 'God' more precisely,

How are we taught the word "God" (its use, that is)? I cannot give an exhaustive
systematic description. But I can as it were make contributions towards the
description; I can say something about it & perhaps in time assemble a sort of
collection of examples.

Reflect in this connection that in a dictionary one would perhaps like to give such
descriptions of use, but in reality one gives only a few examples & explanations.
But also that no more than this is necessary. What use could we make of an
enormously long description?--Well, it would be no use to us if it dealt with the
use of words in languages already familiar to us. But what if we came across such
a description of the use of an Assyrian word? And in what language? Let's say in
another language already known to us.--In this description the word "sometimes"
will frequently occur, or "often", or "usually", or "nearly always" or "almost
never".

It is difficult to form a good picture of a description of this sort.

And what I basically am after all is a painter, & often a very bad painter. MS 138

What is it like when people do not have the same sense of humour? They do not
react properly to each other. It is as though there were a custom among certain
people to throw someone a ball, which he is supposed to catch & throw back; but
certain people might not throw it back, but put it in their pocket instead.

Or what is it like for someone to have no idea how to fathom another's taste? MS
138 32b: 20.5.1949

A picture that is firmly rooted in us may indeed be compared to superstition, but it
may be said too that we always have to reach some sort of firm ground, be it a
picture, or not, so that a picture at the root of all our thinking is to be respected &
not treated as a superstition. MS 138 32b: 20.5.1949

=== p. 115 ===

It is not unheard of†a that†b someone's character may be influenced by the
external world (Weininger). For that only means that, as we know from
experience, people change with circumstances. If someone asks: How could the
environment coerce someone, the ethical in someone?--the answer is that he may
indeed say "No human being has to give way to coercion",†i but all the same
under such circumstances†c someone will do such & such.

'You don't HAVE to, I can show you a (different) way out,--but you won't take it.'
MS 173 17r: 30.3.1950

I do not think that Shakespeare can be set alongside any other poet.

Was he perhaps a creator of language rather than a poet?

I could only stare in wonder at Shakespeare; never do anything with him.

I am deeply suspicious of most of Shakespeare's admirers. I think the trouble is
that, in western culture at least, he stands alone, & so, one can only place him by
placing him wrongly.

It is not as though S. portrayed human types well & were in that respect true to
life. He is not true to life. But he has such a supple hand & such individual brush
strokes. [[sic , ?]] that each one of his characters looks significant, worth looking
at.

"Beethoven's great heart"--no one could say "Shakespeare's great heart". 'The
supple hand that created new natural forms of language' would seem to me nearer
the mark.

The poet cannot really say of himself "I sing as the bird sings"--but perhaps S.
could have said it of himself. MS 173 35r: 12.4.1950 or later

=== p. 116 ===

One & the same theme has a different character in the minor than in the major,
but it is quite wrong to speak generally of a character belonging to the minor. (In
Schubert the major often sounds sadder than the minor.†a)

And similarly, I think, it is idle & futile for the understanding of painting to speak
of the characters of the individual colours. In doing so one really thinks only of
special applications. The fact that green has one effect as the colour of a table
cloth, red another, licenses no conclusion about their effect in a picture. MS 173
69r: 1950

I do not think Shakespeare could have reflected on the 'lot of the poet'.

Neither could he regard himself as a prophet or teacher of humanity.

People regard him with amazement almost as a spectacle of nature. They do not
have the feeling that this brings them into contact with a great human being.
Rather with a phenomenon.

I think that, in order to enjoy a poet, you have to like the culture to which he
belongs as well. If you are indifferent to this or repelled by it, your admiration
cools off.†bMS 173 75v: 1950

If the believer in God looks around & asks "Where does everything I see come
from?" "Where does all that come from?", what he hankers after is

not a (causal) explanation; and the point of his question is that it is the expression
of this hankering.†i He is expressing, then, a stance†a towards all
explanations.--But how is this manifested in his life?

It is the attitude of taking a certain matter seriously, but then at a certain point not
taking it seriously after all, & declaring that something else is still more serious.

Someone may for instance say that it is a very grave matter that such & such a
person has died before he could complete a certain piece of work; & in another

=== p. 117 ===

sense that is not what matters. At this point one uses the words "in a deeper
sense".

Really what I should like to say is that here too what is important is not the words
you use or what you think while saying them, so much as the difference that they
make at different points in your life. How do I know that two people mean the
same thing when each says he believes in God? And just the same thing goes for
the Trinity. Theology that insists on certain†b words & phrases & prohibits others
makes nothing clearer. (Karl Barth)

It gesticulates with words, as it were, because it wants to say something & does
not know how to express it.†c Practice gives the words their sense. MS 173 92r:

A proof of God ought really to be something by means of which you can convince
yourself of God's existence. But I think that believers who offered such proofs
wanted to analyse & make a case for their 'belief' with their intellect, although
they themselves would never have arrived at belief by way of such proofs.
"Convincing someone of God's existence" is something you might do by means of
a certain upbringing, shaping his life in such & such a way.

Life can educate you to "believing in God". And experiences too are what do this
but not visions, or other sense experiences, which show us the "existence of this
being", but e.g. sufferings of various sorts. And they do not show us God as a
sense experience does an object, nor do they give rise to conjectures about him.
Experiences, thoughts,--life can force this concept on us.

So perhaps it is similar to the concept 'object'. MS 174 1v: 1950

The reason I cannot understand Shakespeare is that I want to find symmetry in all
this asymmetry.

It seems to me as though his pieces are, as it were, enormous sketches, not
paintings; as though they were dashed off by someone who could permit himself
anything, so to speak. And I understand how someone may admire this & call it
supreme art, but I don't like it.--So I can understand someone who stands before
those pieces speechless; but someone who admires him as one admires Beethoven,
say, seems to me to misunderstand Shakespeare. MS 174 5r: 24.4.1950 or later

=== p. 118 ===

One age misunderstands another; and a petty age misunderstands all the others in
its own ugly way. MS 174 5v: 1950

How God judges people is something we cannot imagine at all. If he really takes
the strength of temptation & the frailty of nature into account, whom can he
condemn? But if not, then these two forces simply yield as a result the end for
which this person was predestined. In that case he was created so as either to
conquer or succumb as a result of the interplay of forces. And that is not a
religious idea at all, so much as a scientific hypothesis.

So if you want to stay within the religious sphere, you must struggle. MS 174 7v:

Look at human beings: One is poison for the other. A mother for her son, and vice
versa, etc. etc. But the mother is blind & the son too. Perhaps they have a guilty
conscience, but what good does that do them? The child is wicked, but nobody
teaches it to be different, & the parents only spoil it with their foolish affection; &
how are they supposed to understand this, & how is the child to understand it?
They are, so to speak, all wicked & all innocent. MS 174 8r: 1950

Philosophy hasn't made any progress?--If someone scratches where it itches, do
we have to see progress? isn't it genuine scratching otherwise, or genuine itching?
And can't this reaction to the irritation†a go on†b like this for a long time, before a
cure for the itching is found? MS 174 10r: 1950

God may say to me: "I am judging you out of your own mouth. You have
shuddered with disgust at your own actions when you have seen them in other
people". MS 175 56r: 15.3.1951

Is the sense of belief in the Devil this, that not everything that comes to us as an
inspiration is good†a? MS 175 63v: 17.3.1951

=== p. 119 ===

You cannot judge yourself, if you are not versed in the categories. (Frege's style of
writing is sometimes great; Freud writes excellently, & it is a pleasure to read him,
but his writing is never great)†55 MS 176 55v: 6.4.1951

If you throw the fragrant veil of

true love on my head,

at the moving of the hands

the soft stirring of the limbs

bereft of sense becomes the soul.

Can you grasp it as it's drifting
as it stirs with scarce a sound

and deep within the heart its imprint fixes.

At the sounding of the morning's bell

The gardener through the garden's space is passing

Touching with light feet his ground //the ground//

the flowers rouse themselves and gaze

inquiring on his radiant,

