=== chunk: rorty-1984-four-genres/whole ===
title: Rorty, "The Historiography of Philosophy: Four Genres" (1984)
source_pdf: docs/sources/rorty-1984-four-genres/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 1-28
page_scheme: pdf
plan_page_start: 1
plan_page_end: 28
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 1 ===

                       The historiography of philosophy:
                                   four genres
                                                   RICHARD RORTY

                                    I Rational and historical reconstructions
               Analytic philosophers who have attempted 'rational reconstructions' of
               the arguments of great dead philosophers have done so in the hope of
               treating these philosophers as contemporaries, as colleagues with whom
               they can exchange views. They have argued that unless one does this one
               might as well turn over the history of philosophy to historians - whom
               they picture as mere doxographers, rather than seekers after philosophical
               truth. Such reconstructions, however, have led to charges of anachronism.
               Analytic historians of philosophy are frequently accused of beating texts
               into the shape of propositions currently being debated in the philosophical
               journals. It is urged that we should not force Aristotle or Kant to take sides
               in current debates within philosophy of language or metaethics. There
               seems to be a dilemma: either we anachronistically impose enough of our
               problems and vocabulary on the dead to make them conversational
               partners, or we confine our interpretive activity to making their falsehoods
               look less silly by placing them in the context of the benighted times in
               which they were written.
                  Those alternatives, however, do not constitute a dilemma. We should do
               both of these things, but do them separately. We should treat the history of
               philosophy as we treat the history of science. In the latterfield,we have no
               reluctance in saying that we know better than our ancestors what they were
               talking about. We do not think it anachronistic to say that Aristotle had a
               false model of the heavens, or that Galen did not understand how the
               circulatory system worked. We take the pardonable ignorance of great
               dead scientists for granted. We should be equally willing to say that
               Aristotle was unfortunately ignorant that there are no such things as real
               essences, or Leibniz that God does not exist, or Descartes that the mind is
               just the central nervous system under an alternative description. We
               hesitate merely because we have colleagues who are themselves ignorant of
               such facts, and whom we courteously describe not as 'ignorant', but as

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Sussex Library, on 25 Jul 2018 at 13:50:46, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. Cambridge University Press, 2010

=== p. 2 ===

              'holding different philosophical views'. Historians of science have no
              colleagues who believe in crystalline spheres, or who doubt Harvey's
              account of circulation, and they are thus free from such constraints.
                 There is nothing wrong with self-consciously letting our own
              philosophical views dictate terms in which to describe the dead. But there
              are reasons for also describing them in other terms, their own terms. It is
              useful to recreate the intellectual scene in which the dead lived their lives -
              in particular, the real and imagined conversations they might have had with
              their contemporaries (or near-contemporaries). There are purposes for
              which it is useful to know how people talked who did not know as much as
              we do - to know this in enough detail so that we can imagine ourselves
              talking the same outdated language. The anthropologist wants to know
              how primitives talk to fellow-primitives as well as how they react to
              instruction from missionaries. For this purpose he tries to get inside their
              heads, and to think in terms which he would never dream of employing at
              home. Similarly, the historian of science, who can imagine what Aristotle
              might have said in a dialogue in heaven with Aristarchus and Ptolemy,
              knows something interesting which remains unknown to the Whiggish
              astrophysicist who sees only how Aristotle would have been crushed by
              Galileo's arguments. There is knowledge - historical knowledge - to be
              gained which one can only get by bracketing one's own better knowledge
               about, e.g., the movements of the heavens or the existence of God.
                 The pursuit of such historical knowledge must obey a constraint
               formulated by Quentin Skinner:
               No agent can eventually be said to have meant or done something which he could
               never be brought to accept as a correct description of what he had meant or done.
                                                                               (Skinner 1969: 28)

              Skinner says that this maxim excludes 'the possibility that an acceptable
              account of an agent's behaviour could ever survive the demonstration that
              it was itself dependent on the use of criteria of description and classification
              not available to the agent himself. There is an important sense of 'what the
              agent meant or did', as of 'account of the agent's behaviour', for which this
              is an ineluctable constraint. If we want an account of Aristotle's or Locke's
              behaviour which obeys this constraint, however, we shall have to confine
              ourselves to one which, at its ideal limit, tells us what they might have said
              in response to all the criticisms or questions which would have been aimed
              at them by their contemporaries (or, more precisely, by that selection of
              their contemporaries or near-contemporaries whose criticisms and questions they could have understood right off the bat - all the people who,
              roughly speaking, 'spoke the same language', not least because they were
              just as ignorant of what we now know as the great dead philosopher him-

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Sussex Library, on 25 Jul 2018 at 13:50:46, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. Cambridge University Press, 2010

=== p. 3 ===

                                   The historiography of philosophy: four genres                                      51
              self). We may want to go on to ask questions like 'What would Aristotle
              have said about the moons of Jupiter (or about Quine's anti-essentialism)?'
              or 'What would Locke have said about labour unions (or about Rawls)?' or
              'What would Berkeley have said about Ayer's or Bennett's attempt to
              "linguistify" his views on sense-perception and matter?' But we shall not
              describe the answers we envisage them giving to such questions as
              descriptions of what they 'meant or did', in Skinner's sense of these terms.
                 The main reason we want historical knowledge of what unre-educated
              primitives, or dead philosophers and scientists, would have said to each
              other is that it helps us to recognize that there have been different forms of
              intellectual life than ours. As Skinner (1969:52-3) rightly says, 'the
              indispensable value of studying the history of ideas' is to learn 'the
              distinction between what is necessary and what is the product merely of
              our own contingent arrangements'. The latter is indeed, as he goes on to
              say, 'the key to self-awareness itself. But we also want to imagine
              conversations between ourselves (whose contingent arrangements include
              general agreement that, e.g., there are no real essences, no God, etc.) and
              the mighty dead. We want this not simply because it is nice to feel one up
              on one's betters, but because we would like to be able to see the history of
              our race as a long conversational interchange. We want to be able to see it
               that way in order to assure ourselves that there has been rational progress in
               the course of recorded history - that we differ from our ancestors on
               grounds which our ancestors could be led to accept. The need for
               reassurance on this point is as great as the need for self-awareness. We need
               to imagine Aristotle studying Galileo or Quine and changing his mind,
               Aquinas reading Newton or Hume and changing his, etc. We need to think
               that, in philosophy as in science, the mighty mistaken dead look down
               from heaven at our recent successes, and are happy to find that their
               mistakes have been corrected.
                  This means that we are interested not only in what the Aristotle who
               walked the streets of Athens 'could be brought to accept as a correct
               description of what he had meant or done' but in what an ideally reasonable
               and educable Aristotle could be brought to accept as such a description.
               The ideal aborigine can eventually be brought to accept a description of
               himself as having cooperated in the continuation of a kinship system
               designed to facilitate the unjust economic arrangements of his tribe. An
               ideal Gulag guard can eventually be brought to regard himself as having
               betrayed his loyalty to his fellow-Russians. An ideal Aristotle can be
               brought to describe himself as having mistaken the preparatory taxonomic
               stages of biological research for the essence of all scientific inquiry. Each of
               these imaginary people, by the time he has been brought to accept such a
               new description of what he meant or did, has become 'one of us'. He is our

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Sussex Library, on 25 Jul 2018 at 13:50:46, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. Cambridge University Press, 2010

=== p. 4 ===

              contemporary, or our fellow-citizen, or a fellow-member of the same
              disciplinary matrix.
                 To give an example of such conversation with the re-educated dead,
              consider Strawson (1966) on Kant. The Bounds of Sense is inspired by the
              same motives as Individuals - the conviction that Humean psychological
              atomism is deeply misguided and artificial, and that attempts to replace the
              common-sense' Aristotelian' framework of things with 'events' or 'stimuli'
              (in the manner common to Whitehead and Quine) are deeply misguided.
              Since Kant agreed with this line of thought, and since much of the
              'Transcendental Analytic' is devoted to making similar points, it is natural
              for someone with Strawson's concerns to want to show Kant how he can
              make those points without saying some other, less plausible, things which
              he said. These are things which the progress of philosophy since Kant's day
              has freed us from the temptation to say. Strawson can, for example, show
              Kant how to get along without notions like 'in the mind' or 'created by the
              mind', notions from which Wittgenstein and Ryle liberated us. Strawson's
              conversation with Kant is the sort one has with somebody who is
              brilliantly and originally right about something dear to one's heart, but
              who exasperatingly mixes up this topic with a lot of outdated foolishness.
              Other examples of such conversations are Ayer's (1936) and Bennett's
              (1971) conversations with the British Empiricists about phenomenalism -
              conversations which try to filter out the pure essence of phenomenalism
              from questions about the physiology of perception and about the existence
              of God (subjects about which we are now better informed, and thus able to
              perceive the irrelevance). Here again we have a fulfillment of the natural
              desire to talk to people some of whose ideas are quite like our own, in the
              hope of getting them to admit that we have gotten those ideas clearer, or in
              the hope of getting them clearer still in the course of the conversation.1

                   Thus I cannot agree with Michael Ayers' strictures on such attempts, nor with his claim that
                   it is an 'illusion' that ideas in metaphysics, logic, and epistemology, share with Euclid's
                   mathematical ideas 'an independence of the accidents of history' (Ayers 1978: 46). I agree
                   with Jonathan Bennett's claim, quoted by Ayers at p. 54 of his essay, that 'we understand
                   Kant only in proportion as we can say, clearly and in contemporary terms, what his
                   problems were, which of them are still problems and what contribution Kant makes to
                   their solution'. Ayers' reply is that 'On its natural interpretation, this statement [of
                   Bennett's] implies that there can be no such thing as understanding a philosopher in his
                   own terms as something distinct from, and prior to, the difficult achievement of relating his
                   thought to what we ourselves might want to say.' I would rejoin, on Bennett's behalf, that
                   there is indeed a sense in which we can understand what a philosopher says in his own terms
                   before relating his thought to ours, but that this minimal sort of understanding is like being
                   able to exchange courtesies in a foreign tongue without being able to translate what one is
                   saying into our native language. Similarly, one might learn to prove Euclid's mathematical
                   theorems in Greek before learning how to translate them into contemporary mathematical
                   jargon. Translation is necessary if 'understanding' is to mean something more than
                   engaging in rituals of which we do not see the point, and translating an utterance means
                   fitting it into our practices. (See fn. 3 below.) Successful historical reconstructions can only

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Sussex Library, on 25 Jul 2018 at 13:50:46, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. Cambridge University Press, 2010

=== p. 5 ===

                                   The historiography of philosophy: four genres                                       53
                 Such enterprises in commensuration are, of course, anachronistic. But if
              they are conducted in full knowledge of their anachronism, they are
              unobjectionable. The only problems they raise are the verbal one of
              whether rational reconstructions are to be viewed as 'making clear what the
              dead really said', and the equally verbal one of whether rational reconstruc-tors are 'really' doing history. Nothing turns on the answer to either
              question. It is natural to describe Columbus as discovering America rather
              than Cathay, and not knowing that he had done so. It is almost equally
              natural to describe Aristotle as unwittingly describing the effects of gravity
              rather than of natural downward motion. It is slightly more strained, but
              just a further step along the same line, to describe Plato as having
              unconsciously believed that all words were names (or whatever other
              premise modern semantically minded commentators find handy in
              reconstructing his arguments). It is fairly clear that in Skinner's sense of
              'mean* Plato meant nothing like this. When we anachronistically say that
              he 'really* held such doctrines we mean that, in an imagined argument with
              present-day philosophers about whether he should have held certain other
              views, he would have been driven back on a premise which he never
              formulated, dealing with a topic he never considered - a premise which
               may have to be suggested to him by a friendly rational reconstructor.
                 Historical reconstructions of what unre-educated dead thinkers would
               have said to their contemporaries - reconstructions which abide by
               Skinner's maxim - are, ideally, reconstructions on which all historians can
               agree. If the question is what Locke would be likely to have said to a
               Hobbes who had lived and retained his faculties for a few more decades,
               there is no reason why historians should not arrive at a consensus, a
               consensus which might be confirmed by the discovery of a manuscript of
               Locke's in which he imagines a conversation between himself and Hobbes.

                  be performed by people who have some idea of v/hat they themselves think about the issues
                  under discussion, even if only that they are pseudo-issues. Attempts at historical
                  reconstruction which are selfless in this respect (e.g., Wolfson's book on Spinoza) are not
                  so much reconstructions as assemblages of raw material for such reconstructions. So when
                  Avers says at p. 61 that 'Instead of holding Locke's terminology up against that of our own
                  theories, we should try to understand his purposes in relating thought and sensation as he
                  does', I would urge that we cannot do much of the latter until we have done quite a bit of the
                  former. If you do not believe that there are such mental faculties as 'thought' and
                  'sensation' (as many of us post-Wittgensteinian philosophers of mind do not), you are
                  going to have to spend some time figuring out acceptable equivalents to Locke's terms
                  before reading on to see how he uses them - the same sort of thing we atheists have to do
                  when reading works of moral theology. In general, I think that Ayers overdoes the
                  opposition between 'our terms' and 'his terms' when he suggests that one can do historical
                  reconstruction first and leave rational reconstruction for later. The two genres can never be
                  that independent, because you will not know much about what the dead meant prior to
                  figuring out how much truth they knew. These two topics should be seen as moments in a
                  continuing movement around the hermeneutic circle, a circle one has to have gone round a
                  good many times before one can begin to do either sort of reconstruction.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Sussex Library, on 25 Jul 2018 at 13:50:46, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. Cambridge University Press, 2010

=== p. 6 ===

              Rational reconstructions, on the other hand, are not likely to converge, and
              there is no reason why they should. Somebody who thinks that the
              question of whether all words are names, or some other semantical thesis, is
              the sort of question which is decisive for one's views about lots of other
              topics will have a quite different imaginary conversation with Plato than
              somebody who thinks that philosophy of language is a passing fad,
              irrelevant to the real issues which divide Plato from his great modern
              antagonists (Whitehead, Heidegger, or Popper, for example). The Fregean,
              the Kripkean, the Popperian, the Whiteheadian, and the Heideggerian will
              each re-educate Plato in a different way before starting to argue with him.
                  If we picture discussion of great dead philosophers as alternating
              between historical reconstruction, which depends on obeying Skinner's
              maxim, and rational reconstruction, which depends on ignoring it, there
              need be no conflict between the two. When we respect Skinner's maxim we
              shall give an account of the dead thinker 'in his own terms', ignoring the
              fact that we should think ill of anyone who still used those terms today.
              When we ignore Skinner's maxim, we give an account 'in our terms',
              ignoring the fact that the dead thinker, in his linguistic habits as he lived,
              would have repudiated these terms as foreign to his interests and intentions. The contrast between these two tasks, however, should not be
              phrased as that between finding out what the dead thinker meant and
              finding out whether what he said was true. Finding out what someone
              meant is a matter of finding out how his utterance fits into his general
              pattern of linguistic and other behaviour - roughly, finding out what he
              would have said in reply to questions about what he said previously. So
               'what he meant' is different depending upon who is asking such questions.
               More generally, 'what is meant' is different depending upon how large a
               range of actual and possible behavior one evisages. People often say, quite
               reasonably, that they only found out what they meant by listening to what
               they said later on - when they heard themselves reacting to the consequences of their original utterance. It is perfectly reasonable to describe
               Locke as finding out what he really meant, what he was really getting at in
               the Second Treatise, only after conversations in heaven with, successively,
               Jefferson, Marx, and Rawls. It is also perfectly reasonable to set aside the
               question of what an ideal and immortal Locke would have decided that he
               meant. We do the latter if we are interested in the differences between what
               it was like to be a political thinker in Locke's England and in our twentieth-century trans-Atlantic culture.
                   We can, of course, restrict the term 'meaning' to what we are after in the
                latter, Skinnerian, enterprise, rather than using it in a way which permits
                there to be as many meanings of a text as there are dialectical contexts in
                which it can be placed. If we wish to so restrict it, we can adopt E. D.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Sussex Library, on 25 Jul 2018 at 13:50:46, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. Cambridge University Press, 2010

=== p. 7 ===

                                   The historiography of philosophy: four genres                                      55
              Hirsch's distinction between l e a n i n g ' and 'significance', and confine the
              former term to what accords with the author's intentions around the time
              of composition, using Significance' for the place of the text in some other
              context.2 But nothing hangs on this, unless we choose to insist that it is the
              task of the 'historian' to discover 'meaning' and (in the case of philosophical texts) of 'the philosopher' to inquire into 'significance' and eventually
              into truth. What does matter is making clear that grasping the meaning of
              an assertion is a matter of placing that assertion in a context - not of digging
              a little nugget of sense out of the mind of the assertor. Whether we privilege
              the context which consists of what the assertor was thinking about around
              the time he or she made the assertion depends upon what we want to get
              out of thinking about the assertion. If we want, as Skinner says, 'selfawareness', then we need to avoid anachronism as much as possible. If we
              want self-justification through conversation with the dead thinkers about
              our current problems, then we are free to indulge in as much of it as we like,
              as long as we realize that we are doing so.
                 What, then, of finding out whether what the dead thinker said was true?
              Just as determining meaning is a matter of placing an assertion in a context
              of actual and possible behavior, so determining truth is a matter of placing
              it in the context of assertions which we ourselves should be willing to
              make. Since what counts for us as an intelligible pattern of behavior is a
              function of what we believe to be true, truth and meaning are not to be
               ascertained independently of one another.3 There will be as many rational
               reconstructions which purport to find significant truths, or pregnant and
               important falsehoods, in the work of a great dead philosopher, as there are
               importantly different contexts in which his works can be placed. To repeat
               my initial point, the appearance of difference between the history of
               science and the history of philosophy is little more than a reflection of the
               uninteresting fact that some of these differing contexts represent the
               differing opinions of members of the same profession. That is why we find
               more disagreement about how many truths are to be found in the writings
               of Aristotle among historians of philosophy than among historians of

                 See Hirsch 1976: 2ff for this distinction. I would disagree with Hirsch's Ayers-like claim
                 that we cannot start discovering significance unless we first discover meaning, for the same
                 Davidsonian reasons as I disagreed with Ayers in the previous note.
                 See Donald Davidson's articles, collected in his forthcoming Inquiries Into Interpretation
                 and Truth, for a defense of my claim in the previous notes that we cannot find out what
                 somebody means prior to finding out how his linguistic and other practices resemble and
                 differ from ours, nor independently of the charitable assumption that most of his beliefs are
                 true. Ayers' assumption that historical reconstruction is naturally prior to rational
                 reconstruction, and Hirsch's that discovery of meaning is naturally prior to discovery of
                 significance, both seem to me to rest on an insufficiently holistic account of interpretation -
                 an account which I have defended elsewhere (e.g., in 'Pragmatism, Davidson and truth',
                 forthcoming in a volume of essays on Davidson to be edited by Ernest Lepore).

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Sussex Library, on 25 Jul 2018 at 13:50:46, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. Cambridge University Press, 2010

=== p. 8 ===

              biology. The resolution of these debates is a 'philosophical* rather than an
              'historical' question. If similar discord obtained among historians of
              biology, then its resolution would be a 'biological' rather than an 'historical' matter.

                                      II Geistesgeschichte as canon-formation
              So far I have been suggesting that the history of philosophy differs only
              incidentally from the history of one of the natural sciences. In both we have
              a contrast between contextualist accounts which block off later developments from sight and 'Whiggish' accounts which draw on our own better
              knowledge. The only difference I have mentioned is that, because philosophy is more controversial than biology, anachronistic reconstructions of
              great dead philosophers are more various than those of great dead biologists. But my discussion so far has ignored the problem of how one picks
              out who counts as a great dead philosopher, as opposed to a great dead
              something else. So it has ignored the problem of how one picks out the
              history of philosophy from the history of 'thought' or 'culture'. The latter
              sort of problem does not arise for history of biology, because it is coextensive with the history of writing about plants and animals. The
              problem arises only in a relatively trivial form for the history of chemistry,
              because nobody much cares whether we call Paracelsus a chemist, an
              alchemist, or both. Questions about whether Pliny was a biologist in the
              same sense as Mendel, or about whether Aristotle's De Generatione et
              Corruptione counts as chemistry, do not inspire profound passions. This is
              because we have, in these areas, clear stories of progress to tell. It does not
              make much difference at what point we start telling the story - at what
              point we see a 'discipline' emerging out of a chaos of speculation.
                 It does, however, make a difference when we come to the history of
              philosophy. This is because 'history of philosophy' covers a third genre, in
              addition to the two I have discussed so far. Besides such Skinnerian
              historical reconstructions as John Dunn's of Locke or J. B. Schneewind's
              of Sidgwick, and the sort of rational reconstructions offered by Bennett of
               the British Empiricists or Strawson of Kant, there are the big sweeping
              geistesgeschichtlich stories - the genre of which Hegel is paradigmatic. This
               genre is represented in our time by, for example, Heidegger, Reichenbach,
               Foucault, Blumenberg, and Maclntyre. 4 It aims at self-justification in the
                    I am thinking of Heidegger 1973, and of the way in which his later works fill out these
                    sketches. I have discussed Reichenbach's The Rise of Scientific Philosophy (the most
                    comprehensive version of the positivist story of how philosophy gradually emerged from
                    prejudice and confusion) in Rorty 1982: 21 iff. Foucault's The Order of Things is discussed
                    as an example of Geistesgeschichte in section IV of this essay. My references to Blumenbei:g
                    and to Maclntyre are to The Legitimacy of the Modern Age and After Virtue respectively.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Sussex Library, on 25 Jul 2018 at 13:50:46, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. Cambridge University Press, 2010

=== p. 9 ===

                                   The historiography of philosophy: four genres                                      57
              same way as does rational reconstruction, but on a different scale. Rational
              reconstructions typically aim at saying that the great dead philosopher had
              some excellent ideas, but unfortunately couldn't get them straight because
              of 'the limitations of his time'. They usually confine themselves to a
              relatively small portion of the philosopher's work - e.g., Kant on the
              relation between appearance and reality, or Leibniz on modality, or
              Aristotle on the notions of essence, existence, and prediction. They are
              written in the light of some recent work in philosophy which can
              reasonably be said to be 'about the same questions' as the great dead
              philosopher was discussing. They are designed to show that the answers he
              gave to these questions, though plausible and exciting, need restatement or
              purification - or, perhaps, the kind of precise refutation which further
              work in the field has recently made possible. In contrast, Geistesgeschichte,
              works at the level of problematics rather than of solutions to problems. It
              spends more of its time asking cWhy should anyone have made the
              question of — central to his thought?' or 'Why did anyone take the
              problem of — seriously?' than on asking in what respect the great dead
              philosopher's answer or solution accords with that of contemporary
              philosophers. It typically describes the philosopher in terms of his entire
              work rather than in terms of his most celebrated arguments (e.g., Kant as
              the author of all three Critiques, the enthusiast for the French Revolution,
              the forerunner of Schleiermacher's theology, etc., rather than Kant as the
              author of the 'Transcendental analytic'). It wants to justify the historian
              and his friends in having the sort of philosophical concerns they have - in
              taking philosophy to be what they take it to be - rather than in giving the
              particular solutions to philosophical problems which they give. It wants to
              give plausibility to a certain image of philosophy, rather than to give
              plausibility to a particular solution of a given philosophical problem by
              pointing out how a great dead philosopher anticipated, or interestingly
              failed to anticipate, this solution.
                 The existence of this third, geistesgeschichtlich, sort of history of
               philosophy is an additional reason for the prima facie difference between
               history of science and history of philosophy. Historians of science feel no
               need to justify our physicists' concern with elementary particles or our
               biologists' with DNA. If you can synthesize steroids, you do not require
               historical legitimation. But philosophers do need to justify their concern

                  When I say that these are works of self-justification, I of course do not mean that they
                  justify the present state of things, but rather that they justify the author's attitude towards
                  the present state of things. Heidegger's, Foucault's, and Maclntyre's downbeat stories
                  condemn present practices but justify the adoption of their authors' views towards those
                  practices, thereby justifying their selection of what counts as a pressing philosophical issue
                  - the same function as is performed by Hegel's, Reichenbach's, and Blumenberg's upbeat

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Sussex Library, on 25 Jul 2018 at 13:50:46, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. Cambridge University Press, 2010

=== p. 10 ===

              with semantics, or perception, or the unity of Subject and Object, or the
              enlargement of human freedom, or whatever the philosopher who is telling
              the big sweeping story is in fact concerned with. The question of which
              problems are 'the problems of philosophy', which questions are
              philosophical questions, are the questions to which geistesgeschichtlich
              histories of philosophy are principally devoted. By contrast, histories of
              biology or chemistry can dismiss such questions as verbal. They can simply
              take the currently uncontroversial portions of the discipline in question as
              that to which history leads up. The terminus ad quern of history-ofscience-as-story-of-progress is not in dispute.
                  I said above that one reason for the apparent difference between the
              history of philosophy and the history of science stemmed from the fact that
              philosophers who differ about, say, the existence of God are nevertheless
              professional colleagues. The second reason for the apparent difference is
              that those who differ about whether the existence of God is an important or
              interesting or 'real' question are also professional colleagues. The academic
              discipline called 'philosophy' encompasses not only different answers to
              philosophical questions but total disagreement on what questions are
              philosophical. Rational reconstructions and geistesgeschichtlich reinterpretations are, from this point of view, different only in degree - degree of
              disagreement with the great dead philosopher who is being reconstructed
              or reinterpreted. If one disagrees with him mainly about solutions to
              problems, rather than about which problems need discussion, one will
              think of oneself as reconstructing him (as, e.g., Ayer reconstructed
              Berkeley). If one thinks of oneself as showing that one need not think
              about what he tried to think about (as in, e.g., Ayer's dismissive interpretation of Heidegger, or Heidegger's dismissive description of Kierkegaard as
               a 'religious writer' rather than a 'thinker') then one will think of oneself as
               explaining why he should not count as a fellow-philosopher. One will
               redefine 'philosophy' so as to read him out of the canon.
                  Canon-formation is not an issue for the history of science. There is no
               need to affiliate one's own scientific activity to that of a great dead scientist
               in order to make it look more respectable, nor to disparage some purportedly distinguished predecessor as a pseudo-scientist in order to justify
               one's own concerns. Canon-formation is important in the history of
               philosophy because 'philosophy' has an important honorific use, in
               addition to its descriptive uses. Used descriptively, the term 'philosophical
               question' can mean a question which is currently being debated by some
               contemporary 'school', or it can mean a question debated by all or many of
               those historical figures customarily catalogued as 'philosophers'. Used
               honorifically, however, it means questions which ought to be debated -
               which are so general and so important that they should have been on the

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Sussex Library, on 25 Jul 2018 at 13:50:46, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. Cambridge University Press, 2010

=== p. 11 ===

                                   The histerriography ofphilosophy: four genres                                      59
              minds of thinkers of all places and times, whether these thinkers managed
              to formulate these questions explicitly or not. s
                 This honorific use of philosophical question' is, in theory, irrelevant to
              rational reconstructions. A contemporary philosopher who wants to argue
              with Descartes about mind-body dualism or with Kant about the
              appearance-reality distinction or with Aristotle about meaning and
              reference need not, and usually does not, claim that these topics are
              inescapable whenever human beings reflect upon their condition and their
              fate. The rational reconstructor typically confines himself to saying that
              these are topics which have had an interesting career and on which
              interesting work is still being done - as an historian of science might say the
              same about the taxonomy of birds or the varieties of insanity. For purposes
              of rational reconstruction and ensuing argument, there is no need to worry
              about whether a topic is 'inescapable'. For Geistesgeschichte, the sort of
              intellectual history which has a moral, there is such a need. For the moral to
              be drawn is that we have, or have not, been on the right track in raising the
              philosophical questions we have recently been raising, and that the
              Geisteshistoriker is justified in adopting a certain problematic. The rational
              reconstructor, by contrast, feels no more need to ask whether philosophy
              is on the right track than the historian of science needs to ask whether
              contemporary biochemistry is in good shape.
                 The honorific use of 'philosophy' is also irrelevant, in theory, to
              historical reconstruction. If the Geistesgeschichte of the day reads Locke or
              Kierkegaard out of the philosophical canon, contextualist historians can
              continue imperturbably describing what it was like to be Locke or
               Kierkegaard. From the point of view of contextualist history, there is no
              need for great big stories, sweeping over many centuries, in which to
              embed an account of what it was like to be concerned with politics in
               seventeenth-century England or with religion in nineteenth-century
               Denmark. For such historians, the question of whether their chosen figure
              was 'really' a major philosopher, a minor philosopher, a politician, a
               theologian, or a belle-lettrist, is as irrelevant as the taxonomic activities of
               the American Ornithological Union are to the field naturalist taking notes
               on the mating behavior of a flicker, one which the AOU has just
                   The need for an honorific use of 'philosophy', for a canon, and for self-justification seems
                   to me to explain what John Dunn calls 'the weird tendency of much writing, in the history
                   of political thought especially, to be made up of what propositions in what great books
                   remind the author of what propositions in what other great books' (1980: 15). This
                   tendency is the mark of most Geistesgeschichte, and does not seem to me weird. It is the
                   tendency both historians and philosophers indulge when they doff their robes and
                   converse about what they have found useful in their favorite great books. The nice thing
                   about Geistesgeschichte, in my view - the thing that makes it indispensable - is that it meets
                   needs which neither unphilosophical history nor unhistorical philosophy is likely to fulfill.
                   (See section IV below for discussion of the suggestion that we repress these needs.)

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Sussex Library, on 25 Jul 2018 at 13:50:46, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. Cambridge University Press, 2010

=== p. 12 ===

              reclassified behind his back. One might, in one's philosophical capacity,
              share the Anglo-Saxon belief that no philosophical progress occurred
              between Kant and Frege and still, as an historian, delight in recapturing the
              concerns of Schiller and Schelling.
                 But this theoretical independence of both historical and rational
              reconstructions from canon-formation is rarely lived up to in practice.
              Rational reconstructors do not really want to bother reconstructing, and
              arguing with, minor philosophers. Historical reconstructors would like to
              reconstruct people who were Significant' in the development of something
              - if not philosophy, then perhaps 'European thought' or 'the modern'.
              Work in both reconstructive genres is always done with one eye out for the
              most recent work in canon-formation, and that is the prerogative of the
              Geistesbistoriker. For he is the person who wields terms like 'philosophy'
              and 'philosophical question' in their honorific senses. He is thus the person
              who decides what is worth thinking about - which questions are matters of
              the 'contingent arrangements' of our day and which are the ones which tie
              us together with our ancestors. As the person who decides who was
              'getting at' what was really important and who was merely distracted by
              the epiphenomena of his times, he plays the role which, in the ancient
              world, was played by the sage. One difference between that world and ours
              is that the high culture of modern times has become aware that the
              questions human beings have thought inescapable have changed over the
              centuries. We have become aware, as the ancient world was not, that we
              may not know which questions are the really important ones. We fear that
              we may still be working with philosophical vocabularies which are to 'the
               real' problems as, say, Aristotle's vocabulary was to 'the real' subject-matter of astrophysics. This sense that one's choice of vocabulary matters
               at least as much as one's answers to the questions posed within a given
               vocabulary has caused the Geisteshistoriker to displace the philosopher (or,
               as with Hegel, Nietzsche and Heidegger, has caused 'philosophy' to be
               used as the name of a certain particularly abstract and free-wheeling kind of
               intellectual history).
                  This last point can be put more simply by saying that nowadays nobody
               is sure that the descriptive senses of 'philosophical question' have anything
               much to do with the honorific sense of this term. Nobody is quite sure
               whether the issues discussed by contemporary philosophy professors (of
               any school) are issues which are 'necessary' or merely part of our
               'contingent arrangements'. Furthermore, nobody is sure whether the
               issues discussed by all or most of the canon of great dead philosophers
               offered by books called The History of Western Philosophy - e.g., universals, mind and body, free will, appearance and reality, fact and value, etc. -
               are important issues. Occasionally, both inside and outside of philosophy,

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Sussex Library, on 25 Jul 2018 at 13:50:46, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. Cambridge University Press, 2010

=== p. 13 ===

                                   The historiography ofphilosophy: four genres                                         61
              the suspicion is voiced that some or all of these are 'merely philosophical' -
              a term used in the same pejorative way as a chemist uses 'alchemical', or a
              Marxist 'superstructural', or an aristocrat 'middle class'. The self-awareness which historical reconstructions have given us is the awareness that
              some people who were our intellectual and moral equals were not interested in questions which seem to us inescapable and profound. Because
              such historical reconstructions are a source of doubt about whether
              philosophy (in either of its descriptive senses) is important, the
              Geisteshistoriker now puts the philosopher in his place, rather than the
              converse. He does this by assembling a cast of historical characters, and a
              dramatic narrative, which shows how we have come to ask the questions
              we now think inescapable and profound. Where these characters left
              writings behind, those writings then form a canon, a reading-list which one
              must have gone through in order to justify being what one is.
                  I can sum up what I have been saying about the third genre of
              historiography of philosophy by saying that it is the genre which takes
              responsibility for identifying which writers are 'the gread dead philosophers'. In this role, it is parasitic upon, and synthesises, the first two
              genres - historical reconstructions and reconstructions. Unlike rational
              reconstructions, and unlike the history of science, it has to worry about
              anachronism, for it cannot regard the question of who counts as a
              philosopher as settled by the practices of those presently so described.
              Unlike historical reconstructions, however, it cannot stay within the
              vocabulary used by a pastfigure.It has to 'place' that vocabulary in a series
              of vocabularies and estimate its importance by placing it in a narrative
              which traces changes in vocabulary. It is self-justificatory in the way that
              rational reconstruction is, but it is moved by the same hope for greater self-awareness which leads people to engage in historical reconstructions. For
               Geistesgeschichte wants to keep us aware of the fact that we are still en route
              - that the dramatic narrative it offers us is to be continued by our
              descendants. When it is fully self-conscious it wonders whether all the
               issues discussed so far may not have been part of the 'contingent arrangements' of earlier times. It insists on the point that even if some of them
               really were necessary and inescapable, we have no certainty about which
               these were.

                                                        Ill Doxography
               The three genres I have described so far bear little relation to the genre
               which comes first to mind when the term 'history of philosophy' is used.
               This genre, my fourth, is the most familiar and most dubious. I shall call it
               doxography. This is exemplified by books which start from Thales or

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Sussex Library, on 25 Jul 2018 at 13:50:46, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. Cambridge University Press, 2010

=== p. 14 ===

              6l                                      RICHARD RORTY

              Descartes and wind up with some figure roughly contemporary with the
              author, ticking off what various figures traditionally called 'philosophers'
              had to say about problems traditionally called philosophical'. It is this
              genre which inspires boredom and despair. It is the one to which Gilbert
              Ryle (1971: x) referred when he offhandedly said, as an excuse for his own
              risky rational reconstructions of Plato and others, that the existence of 'our
              standard histories of philosophy' was 'calamity itself, and not the mere risk
              of it'. I suspect that most of his readers heartily agreed. Even the most
              honest and conscientious and exhaustive books called A History of Philosophy - especially these, indeed - seem to decorticate the thinkers they
              discuss. It is this calamity to which proponents of historical reconstruction
              respond by insisting on the need for spelling out the contexts in which the
              texts were written, and to which proponents of rational reconstruction
              respond by insisting that we look at the great dead philosophers in the light
              of 'the best work now being done on the problems they discussed'. Both
              are attempts to revitalize figures who have unintentionally been mummified.
                 The explanation of the calamity, I think, is that most historians of
              philosophy who try to tell 'the story of philosophy from the pre-Socratics
              to our own day' know in advance what most of their chapter headings are
              going to be. Indeed, they know their publishers would not accept their
              manuscripts if a substantial number of the expected headings were missing.
              They work, typically, with a canon which made sense in terms of
              nineteenth-century neo-Kantian notions of 'the central problems of philosophy', notions which few modern readers take seriously. This has
              resulted in desperate attempts to make Leibniz and Hegel, Mill and
              Nietzsche, Descartes and Carnap, talk about some common topics,
              whether the historian or his readers have any interest in those topics or not.
                 In the sense in which I shall be using the term, doxography is the attempt
              to impose a problematic on a canon drawn up without reference to that
              problematic, or, conversely, to impose a canon on a problematic constructed without reference to that canon. Diogenes Laetius gave doxogra-phy a bad name by insisting on answering the question 'What did X think
              the good was?' for every X in an antecedently formulated canon.
              Nineteenth-century historians gave it a worse one by insisting on answering the question 'What did X think the nature of knowledge was?' for every
              X in another such canon. Analytic philosophers are in a fair way to
              worsening the situation by insisting on an answer to the question 'What
              was X's theory of meaning?' as are Heideggerians by insisting on an answer
              to 'What did X think Being was?' Such awkward attempts to make a new
              question fit an old canon remind us, however, that new doxographies
              usually started off as fresh, brave, revisionist attempts to dispel the dullness

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Sussex Library, on 25 Jul 2018 at 13:50:46, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. Cambridge University Press, 2010

=== p. 15 ===

                                   The historiography of philosophy: four genres                                      63
              of the previous doxographic tradition, attempts inspired by the conviction
              that the true problematic of philosophy had finally been discovered. So the
              real trouble with doxography is that it is a half-hearted attempt to tell a new
              story of intellectual progress by describing all texts in the light of recent
              discoveries. It is half-hearted because it lacks the courage to readjust the
              canon to suit the new discoveries.
                  The main reason for this recurrent half-heartedness is the idea that
              'philosophy' is the name of a natural kind - the name of a discipline which,
              in all ages and places, has managed to dig down to the same deep,
              fundamental, questions. So once somebody has somehow been identified
              as a 'great philosopher' (as opposed to a great poet, scientist, theologian,
              political theorist, or whatever), he has to be described as studying those
              questions.6 Since each new generation of philosophers claims to have
              discovered what those deep fundamental questions really are, each has to
              figure out how the great philosopher can be viewed as having been
              concerned with them. So we get brave new doxographies which look, a few
              generations further on, just as calamitous as their predecessors.
                  To get rid of this idea that philosophy is a natural kind, we need more
              and better contextualist historical reconstructions on the one hand, and
              more self-confident Geistesgeschichte on the other. We need to realize that
              the questions which the 'contingent arrangements' of the present time lead
              us to regard as the questions are questions which may be better than those
              which our ancestors asked, but need not be the same. They are not
               questions which any reflective human being must necessarily have
               encountered. We need to see ourselves not as responding to the same
               stimuli to which our ancestors responded, but as having created new and
               more interesting stimuli for ourselves. We should justify ourselves by
               claiming to be asking better questions, not by claiming to give better
               answers to the permanent 'deep, fundamental questions' which our
              ancestors answered badly. We can think of the fundamental questions of
               philosophy as the ones which everybody really ought to have asked, or as
               the ones which everybody would have asked if they could, but not as the
               ones which everybody did ask whether they knew it or not. It is one thing
               to say that a great dead philosopher would have been driven to have a view
               on a certain topic if we had had a chance to talk to him, thus enabling him
               to see what the fundamental questions of philosophy really were. It is
                   Jonathan Ree is very informative on the development of the idea that there is a common
                   ahistorical set of questions for philosophers to answer. In his excellent essay 'Philosophy
                   and the history of philosophy', Ree speaks of Renouvier's conviction that 'the so-called
                   history of philosophy was really only the story of individuals opting for different
                   philosophical positions; the positions themselves were always there, eternally available and
                   unchanging' (Ree 1978: 17). This is the guiding assumption of what I am calling
                   doxography.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Sussex Library, on 25 Jul 2018 at 13:50:46, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. Cambridge University Press, 2010

=== p. 16 ===

              another thing to say that he had an 'implicit' view on that topic which we
              can dig out of what he wrote. What is interesting about him often is that it
              never crossed his mind that he had to have a view on the topic. This is just
              the sort of interesting information we get from contextualist historical
              reconstructions.
                 My claim that philosophy is not a natural kind can be restated with
              reference to the popular notion that philosophy deals with 'methodological', or 'conceptual', meta-issues thrown off by the special disciplines, or
              more generally by other areas of culture. Such a claim is plausible if it
              means that, in every period, there have been questions which arose from
              the clash between old ideas and new ideas (in the sciences, in art, in politics,
              etc.) and that these questions are the concern of the more original,
              dilettantish and imaginative intellectuals of the day. But it becomes
              implausible if it means that these questions are always about the same
              topics - e.g., the nature of knowledge, or reality, or truth, or meaning, or
              the good, or some other abstraction sufficiently fuzzy to blur the differences between historical epochs. One can parody this notion of philosophy by imagining that, at the dawn of the study of animals, a distinction
              became established between 'primary biology' and 'secondary biology',
              analogous to Aristotle's distinction between 'first philosophy' and
              'physics'. On this conception, the larger, more salient, more impressive
              and paradigmatic animals were the concern of a special discipline. So
              theories were developed about the common features of the python, the
              bear, the lion, the eagle, the ostrich, and the whale. Such theories,
              formulated with the help of some suitably fuzzy abstractions, were rather
              clever and interesting. But people kept coming along with other things to
              be fitted into the canon of 'primary animals'. The giant rat of Sumatra, the
              giant butterflies of Brazil, and (more controversially) the unicorn had to be
              taken into account. Criteria for the adequacy of theories in primary
              biology became less clear as the canon was enlarged. Then came the bones
              of the moa and the mammoth. Things got still more complicated. Eventually the secondary biologists got so good at producing new forms of life in
              test tubes that they amused themselves by bringing their gargantuan new
              creations upstairs and challenging the bewildered primary biologists to
               make a place for them. Watching the contortions of the primary biologists
               as they tried to devise theories which would accommodate these new
               canonical items engendered a certain contempt for primary biology as an
               autonomous discipline.
                  The analogies I wish to draw are between 'primary biology' and 'history
               of philosophy', and between 'secondary biology' and 'intellectual history'.
               History of philosophy, disconnected from the wider history of the
               intellectuals, makes some sense if it covers only a century or two - if it is,

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Sussex Library, on 25 Jul 2018 at 13:50:46, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. Cambridge University Press, 2010

=== p. 17 ===

                                   The historiography ofphilosophy: four genres                                       65
              for example, a story of the steps which led from Descartes to Kant. Hegel's
              story of the unfolding of Cartesian subjectivity into transcendental philosophy, or Gilson's story of the reductio ad absurdum of representationalist
              theories of knowledge, are examples of interesting narratives which can be
              constructed by ignoring wider contexts. These are just two among many
              plausible and interesting ways of noting similarities and differences
              between a dozen salient and impressive figures who span about 175 years
              (Descartes, Hobbes, Malebranche, Locke, Condillac, Leibniz, Wolff,
              Berkeley, Hume, and Kant - plus or minus a few names at the historian of
              philosophy's discretion). But when one tries to tack on Hegel himself at
              one end of such a story, or Bacon and Ramus at the other, things get rather
              tendentious. When one tries to tie in Plato and Aristotle, there seem so
              many ways to do so - depending upon which Platonic dialogue or
              Aristotelian treatise one takes as 'fundamental' - that alternative stories
              proliferate wildly. Further, Plato and Aristotle are so big and impressive
              that describing them in terms originally developed for use on people like
              Hobbes and Berkeley begins to seem a little odd. Then there is the problem
              of whether to treat Augustine and Aquinas and Ockham as philosophers or
              as theologians - not to mention the problems raised by Lao Tse, Shankara,
              and similar exotic specimens. To make everything worse, all the time that
              historians of philosophy are wondering how to get all these people in under
              the old rubrics, mischievous intellectuals keep concocting new intellectual
              compounds and daring historians of philosophy to refuse to call them
               'philosophies'. Once it becomes necessary to contrive a story which
              connects all or most of the people previously mentioned with G. E. Moore,
               Saul Kripke and Gilles Deleuze, historians of philosophy are about ready
               to give up.
                  They should give up. We should just stop trying to write books called A
              History of Philosophy which begin with Thales and end with, say, Wittgen-stein. Such books are interspersed with desperately factitious excuses for
               not discussing, e.g., Plotinus, Comte, or Kierkegaard. They gallantly
               attempt to find a few 'continuing concerns' which run through all the great
               philosophers who do get included. But they are continually embarrassed
               by the failure of even the most silent and unskippable figures to discuss
               some of those concerns, and by those vast arid stretches in which one or
               other concern seems to have escaped everybody's mind (They have to
               worry, for example, about the absence or the skimpiness of chapters
               headed 'Epistemology in the sixteenth century' or 'Moral philosophy in
               the twelfth century' or 'Logic in the eighteenth century'.) It is no wonder
               that geistesgeschichtlich intellectual historians - those who write the great
               sweeping self-justifying stories - are often contemptuous of the sort of
               doxography common to Windelband and Russell. Nor is it any wonder

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Sussex Library, on 25 Jul 2018 at 13:50:46, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. Cambridge University Press, 2010

=== p. 18 ===

              that analytic philosophers and Heideggerians should try - each in their
              separate ways - to find something new for the history of philosophy to be.
              The attempt to skim the cream off intellectual history by writing a history
              'of philosophy' is as foredoomed as the attempt of my imaginary primary
              biologists' to skim the cream off the animal kingdom. Both attempts
              assume that certain elementary components of the miscellaneous stuff
              churning around at the bottom naturally float up to the top.
                  This cream-skimming picture assumes a contrast between the higher and
              purer history of something called 'philosophy' - the quest for knowledge
              about permanent and enduring topics by people who specialized in that
              sort of thing - and 'intellectual history' as the chronicle of quaint tergiversations of opinion among people who were, at best, litterateurs or political
              activists or clergymen. When this picture, and this implicit contrast, are
              challenged, offense is often taken at the suggestion that philosophy is not
              the pursuit of knowledge, that it is (as the freshmen like to say) 'all a matter
              of opinion'. Alternatively, this same offense is expressed by saying if we
              discard the traditional contrast we shall have reduced philosophy to
              'rhetoric' (as opposed to 'logic') or 'persuasion' (as opposed to 'argument')
              or something else low and literary rather than high and scientific. Since the
              self-image of philosophy as a professional discipline still depends upon its
              quasi-scientific character, criticism of the assumption behind the cream-skimming picture is taken as a challenge to philosophy itself as a professional activity, not merely to one branch of it called 'history of
              philosophy'.
                  One can mitigate the offense while still avoiding the cream-skimming
              picture by adopting a sociological view of the distinction between knowledge and opinion. On this view, to say that something is a matter of
              opinion is just to say that deviance from the current consensus on that topic
               is compatible with membership in some relevant community. To say that it
               is knowledge is to say that deviance is incompatible. For example, in
               America the choice of whom to vote for is 'a matter of opinion' but we
               know that the press should be free from government censorship. Good-thinking Russians know that such censorship is necessary, but they regard
               the question of whether to send dissidents to labor camps or asylums as a
               matter of opinion. These two communities do not accept as members those
               who fail to claim as knowledge what is generally so claimed. Analogously,
               to say that the existence of real essences, or of God, is a 'matter of opinion'
               within philosophy departments is to say that people who differ on this
               point can still get grants from, or be employed by, the same institutions,
               can award degrees to the same students, etc. By contrast, those who share
               Ptolemy's opinions on the planets or William Jennings Bryan's on the
               origin of species are excluded from respectable astronomy and biology

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Sussex Library, on 25 Jul 2018 at 13:50:46, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. Cambridge University Press, 2010

=== p. 19 ===

                                   The historiography of philosophy: four genres                                      67
              departments, for membership there requires that one know that these
              opinions are false. So anybody can legitimize his use of the term
              philosophical knowledge' simply by pointing to a self-conscious community of philosophers, admission to which requires agreement on certain
              points (e.g., that there are, or are not, real essences or inalienable human
              rights, or God). Within that community, we shall have agreement on
              known premises, and the pursuit of further knowledge, in just the sense in
              which we find such premises and such a pursuit in biology and astronomy
              departments.
                 The existence of such a community is, however, entirely irrelevant to the
              question of whether anything links that community to Aristotle, Plotinus,
              Descartes, Kant, Moore, Kripke, or Deleuze. Such communities should be
              at liberty to seek out their own intellectual ancestors, without reference to a
              previously established canon of great dead philosophers. They should also
              be free to claim to have no ancestors at all. They should feel free to pick out
              whatever bits of the past they like and call those 'the history of philosophy', without reference to anything anybody has previously called
              'philosophy', or to ignore the past entirely. Anybody who is willing to give
              up the attempt to find common interests which unite him or her with all the
              other members of, say, the American Philosophical Association or the
              Mind Association or the Deutsche Philosophische Gesellschaft (and one
              would have to be a bit mad to be unwilling to give up that attempt) is thus
              free to give up the attempt to write A History of Philosophy with the usual
              chapter headings. He or she is free to create a new canon, as long as they
              respect the right of others to create alternative canons. We should welcome
              people who, like Reichenbach, wave Hegel aside. We should encourage
              people who are tempted to dismiss Aristotle as a biologist who got out of
              his depth, or Berkeley as an eccentric bishop, or Frege as an original
              logician with unjustified epistemological pretensions, or Moore as a
              charming amateur who never quite understood what the professionals
              were doing. They should be urged to try it, and to see what sort of
              historical story they can tell when these people are left out and some
              unfamiliar people are brought in. It is only with the aid of such experimental alterations of the canon that doxography can be avoided. It is just such
              alterations which Geistesgeschichte makes possible and which doxography
              discourages.

                                                   IV Intellectual history
               So far I have distinguished four genres and suggested that one of them be
               allowed to wither away. The remaining three are indispensable and do not
               compete with one another. Rational reconstructions are necessary to help

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Sussex Library, on 25 Jul 2018 at 13:50:46, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. Cambridge University Press, 2010

=== p. 20 ===

              us present-day philosophers think through our problems. Historical
              reconstructions are needed to remind us that these problems are historical
              products, by demonstrating that they were invisible to our ancestors.
              Geistesgeschichte is needed to justify our belief that we are better off than
              those ancestors by virtue of having become aware of those problems. Any
              given book in the history of philosophy will, of course, be a mixture of
              these three genres. But usually one or another motive dominates, since
              there are three distinct tasks to be performed. The distinctness of these
              tasks is important and not to be broken down. It is precisely the tension
              between the brisk Whiggery of the rational reconstructors and the mediated and ironic empathy of the contextualists - between the need to get on
              with the task at hand and the need to see everything, including that task, as
              one more contingent arrangement - that produces the need for Geistesges-chichte, for the self-justification which this third genre provides. Each such
              Justification, however, insures the eventual appearance of a new set of
              complacent doxographies, disgust with which will inspire new rational
              reconstructions, under the aegis of new philosophical problematics which
              will have arisen in the meantime. These three genres thus form a nice
              example of the standard Hegelian dialectical triad.
                 I should like to use the term 'intellectual history' for a much richer and
              more diffuse genre - one which falls outside this triad. In my sense,
              intellectual history consists of descriptions of what the intellectuals were
              up to at a given time, and of their interaction with the rest of society -
              descriptions which, for the most part, bracket the question of what
              activities which intellectuals were conducting. Intellectual history can
              ignore certain problems which must be settled in order to write the history
              of a discipline - questions about which people count as scientists, which as
              poets, which as philosophers, etc. Descriptions of the sort I have in mind
              may occur in treatises called something like 'Intellectual life in fifteenth-century Bologna', but they may also occur in the odd chapter or paragraph
              of political or social or economic or diplomatic histories, or indeed in the
              odd chapter or paragraph of histories of philosophy (of any of the four
               genres distinguished above). Such treatises, chapters and paragraphs produce, when read and pondered by someone interested in a certain spatiotemporal region, a sense of what it was like to be an intellectual in that
               region - what sort of books one read, what sorts of things one had to worry
               about, what choices one had of vocabularies, hopes, friends, enemies, and
               careers.
                 To have a sense of what it was to be a young and intellectually curious
               person in such a region one has to know a lot of social, political and
               economic history as well as a lot of disciplinary history. A book like E. P.
               Thompson's Making of the English Working Class (1963) tells one a lot

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Sussex Library, on 25 Jul 2018 at 13:50:46, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. Cambridge University Press, 2010

=== p. 21 ===

                                   The historiography qfphilosophy: four genres                                       69
              about the chances and audiences open to Paine and Cobbett as well as
              about wages, the living conditions of miners and weavers, and the tactics of
              politicians. A book like Norman Fiering's Moral Philosophy at Seventeenth-Century Harvard (1981) tells one a lot about what kind of intellectual it was possible to be at Harvard in that period. Fiering's book flows
              together with passages in biographies of Harvard presidents and Mas-sachusetts governors to produce a sense of how these possibilities changed.
              Passages in Thompson's flow together with passages in biographies of
              Bentham and of Melbourne to show how other possibilities changed. The
              totality of such books and passages comes together in the minds of those
              who read them in such a way as to produce a sense of the differences
              between the options open to an intellectual at different times and places.
                 I should want to include under 'intellectual history' books about all
              those enormously influential people who do not get into the canon of great
              dead philosophers, but who are often called 'philosophers' either because
              they held a chair so described, or for lack of any better idea - people like
              Erigena, Bruno, Ramus, Mersenne, Wolff, Diderot, Cousin, Schopen-hauer, Hamilton, McCosh, Bergson and Austin. Discussion of these
              'minor figures' often coalesces with thick description of institutional
              arrangements and disciplinary matrices, since part of the historical problem they pose is to explain why these non-great philosophers or quasi-philosophers should have been taken so much more seriously than the
              certifiably great philosophers of their day. Then there are the books about
              the thought and influence of people who are not usually called 'philosophers' but are at least borderline cases of the species. These are people
              who in fact did the jobs which philosophers are popularly supposed to do -
              impelling social reform, supplying new vocabularies for moral deliberation, deflecting the course of scientific and literary disciplines into new
              channels. They include, for example, Paracelsus, Montaigne, Grotius,
               Bayle, Lessing, Paine, Coleridge, Alexander von Humboldt, Emerson, T.
              H. Huxley, Mathew Arnold, Weber, Freud, Franz Boas, Walter Lippman,
               D. H. Lawrence, and T. S. Kuhn - not to mention all those unfamiliar
              people (e.g., the authors of influential treatises on the philosophical
               foundations of Polizeiwissenschaft) who turn up in the footnotes to
               Foucault's books. If one wants to understand what it was to be a scholar in
               sixteenth-century Germany or a political thinker in eighteenth-century
               America or a scientist in late-nineteenth-century France or a journalist in
               early-twentieth-century Britain - if one wants to know what sort of issues
               and temptations and dilemmas confronted a young person who wanted to
               become part of the high culture of those times and places - these are the sort
               of people one has to know about. If one knows enough about enough of
               them, one can tell a detailed and convincing story of the conversation of

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Sussex Library, on 25 Jul 2018 at 13:50:46, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. Cambridge University Press, 2010

=== p. 22 ===

              Europe, a story which may mention Descartes, Hume, Kant, and Hegel
              only in passing.
                 Once we drop below the skipping-from-peak-to-peak level of
              Geistesgeschichte to the nitty-gritty of intellectual history, the distinctions
              between great and non-great dead philosophers, between clear and
              borderline cases of 'philosophy', and between philosophy, literature,
              politics, religion and social science, are of less and less importance. The
              question of whether Weber was a sociologist or a philosopher, Arnold a
              literary critic or a philosopher, Freud a psychologist or a philosopher,
              Lippman a philosopher or a journalist, like the question of whether we can
              include Francis Bacon as a philosopher if we exclude Robert Fludd, are
              obviously matters to be settled after we have written our intellectual
              history rather than before. Interesting filiations which connect these
              borderline cases with clearer cases of 'philosophy' will or will not appear,
              and on the basis of such filiations we shall adjust our taxonomies.
              Furthermore, new paradigm cases of philosophy produce new termini for
              such filiations. New accounts of intellectual history interact with contemporary developments to readjust continually the list of 'philosophers',
              and eventually these readjustments produce new canons of great dead
              philosophers. Like the history of anything else, history of philosophy is
              written by the victors. Victors get to choose their ancestors, in the sense
              that they decide which among their all too various ancestors to mention,
              write biographies of, and commend to their descendants.
                  As long as 'philosophy' has an honorific use it will matter which figures
              count as 'philosophers'. So if things go well we can expect continual
               revisions of the philosophical canon in order to bring it into line with the
              present needs of high culture. If they go badly, we can expect the stubborn
               perpetuation of a canon - one which will look quainter and more factitious
               as the decades pass. On the picture I wish to present, intellectual history is
               the raw material for the historiography of philosophy - or, to vary the
               metaphor, the ground out of which histories of philosophy grow. The
               Hegelian triad I have sketched becomes possible only once we have, with
               an eye both to contemporary needs and to the recent writings of revisionist
               intellectual historians, formulated a philosophical canon. Doxography, on
               the other hand, as the genre which pretends to find a continuous streak of
               philosophical ore running through all the space-time chunks which the
               intellectual historians describe, is relatively independent of current
               developments in intellectual history. Its roots are in the past - in the
               forgotten combination of transcended cultural needs and outdated intellectual history which produced the canon it enshrines.
                  This role as inspiration for the reformulation of the (philosophical and
               other) canons is, however, not the only use for intellectual history.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Sussex Library, on 25 Jul 2018 at 13:50:46, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. Cambridge University Press, 2010

=== p. 23 ===

                                    The historiography of philosophy: four genres                                      71
               Another is to play the same dialectical role with respect to Geistesges-chichte as historical reconstruction plays to rational reconstruction. I have
               said that historical reconstructions remind us of all those quaint little
               controversies the big-name philosophers worried about, the ones which
               distracted them from the 'real' and 'enduring' problems which we moderns
               have managed to get in clearer focus. By so reminding us, they induce a
               healthy skepticism about whether we are all that clear and whether our
               problems are all that real. Analogously, Ong on Ramus, Yates on Lull,
               Fiering on Mather, Wartofsky on Feuerbach, and so on remind us that the
               great dead philosophers whom we spend our time reconstructing were
               often less influential - less central to the conversation of their own and
               several intervening generations - than a lot of people we have never
               thought about. They also make us see the people in our current canon as
               less original, less distinctive, than they had seemed before. They come to
               look like specimens reiterating an extinct type rather than mountain peaks.
               So intellectual history works to keep Geistesgeschichte honest, just as
               historical reconstruction operates to keep rational reconstructions honest.
                   Honesty here consists in keeping in mind the possibility that our self-justifying conversation is with creatures of our own phantasy rather than
               with historical personages, even ideally re-educated historical personages.
               Such a possibility needs to be acknowledged by those setting out to write
               Geistesgeschichte, because they need to worry about whether their own
               chapter headings may have been too much influenced by those of the
               doxographies. In particular, when a professor of philosophy sets out on
               such a self-justificatory project he usually does so only after decades of
               giving courses on various great dead philosophers - those whose names
               appear in the syllabus for examinations to be taken by his students, a
                syllabus he is likely to have inherited rather than composed. It is natural for
               him to write Geistesgeschichte by stringing a lot of those notes together,
                thus skipping between the same old peaks, passing over in silence the
                philosophical flatlands of, e.g., the third and fifteenth centuries. This sort
                of thing leads to such extreme cases as Heidegger's attempt to write 'the
                history of Being' by commenting upon texts mentioned in Ph.D. examinations in philosophy in German universities early in this century. In the
                aftermath of being enthralled by the drama Heidegger stages, one may
                begin to find it suspicious that Being stuck so closely to the syllabus.
                   Heidegger's followers changed the syllabus in order to make everything
                lead up to Nietzche and Heidegger, just as Russell's changed the syllabus to
                make it lead up to Frege and Russell. Geistesgeschichte can change canons
                in a way that doxography does not. But such partial canon-revision
                highlights the fact that Nietzsche may only seem that important to people
                overly impressed by Kantian ethics, just as Frege may only seem that

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Sussex Library, on 25 Jul 2018 at 13:50:46, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. Cambridge University Press, 2010

=== p. 24 ===

              Jl                                      RICHARD RORTY
               important to people overly impressed by Kantian epistemology. It still
               leaves us bemused by the question how Kant ever got to be that important
               in the first place. We tend to explain to our students that their own
               philosophical thinking must go through Kant rather than around him, but
               it is not clear that we mean more than that they will not understand our
               own books if they have not read Kant's. When we draw back from the
               philosophical canon in the way made possible by reading the detailed and
               thickly interwoven stories found in intellectual history, we can ask
               whether it is all that important for the students to understand what we
               contemporary philosophers are doing. That is the sort of honest self-doubt
               which gives people the motive and the courage to write radically innovative
               Geistesgeschichte - the kind exemplified by Foucault's The Order of
                Things, with its famous reference to 'the figure we call Hume'.
                   Foucauldians may object to my description of that book as Geistesges-chichte, but it is important for my argument to group it together with, e.g.
               Hegel's and Blumenberg's histories. For all of Foucault's insistence on
               materiality and contingency, his conscious opposition to the geistlich and
               dialectical character of Hegel's story, there are lots of resemblances
               between that story and his own. Both help to answer the question which
                doxography eschews: in what ways are we better and in what ways worse
               off than this or that set of predecessors? Both assign us a place in an epic,
                the epic of modern Europe, though in Foucault's case it is an epic over
               which no Geschick presides. Foucault's, like Hegel's, is a story with a
               moral; it is true that both Foucault and his readers have trouble formulating that.moral, but we should remember that the same was true for Hegel
               and his readers. Foucault ties in 'the figure we call Hume' with what the
               doctors and the police were up to at the time, just as Hegel tied in various
               philosophers with what the priests and the tyrants of their times were
               doing. Hegel's subsumption of the material under the spiritual attempts the
               same task as Foucault's account of truth in terms of power. Both try to
               convince us intellectuals of something we badly need to believe - that the
                high culture of a given period is not just froth, but rather an expression of
                something that goes all the way down.
                   I insist on this point because the example of Foucault, taken together
               with the suspicion I have voiced about philosophy as a natural kind, and
               about the cream-skimming model of the relation between intellectual
               history and the history of philosophy, might lead one to suggest that if
               doxography goes it should take Geistesgeschichte with it. Many admirers of
               Foucault are inclined to think that we do not need any more accounts of
                how die Gipfel sehen einander. Indeed, one might be tempted to go
               further and suggest that 'the historiography of philosophy' is itself a notion
               which has outlived its usefulness - because, roughly, the honorific use of

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Sussex Library, on 25 Jul 2018 at 13:50:46, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. Cambridge University Press, 2010

=== p. 25 ===

                                   The historiography ofphilosophy: four genres                                       73
              'philosophy' has outlived its. If we have the sort of complicated, thick,
              intellectual history which is wary of canons (philosophical, literary,
              scientific, or other) do not we have enough? Is there any need for history of
              something special called 'philosophy' any more than there is a need to carry
              on a discipline which goes by that name? If we really believe that there is no
              God, no real essences, nor any surrogate for either, if we follow Foucault in
              being consistently materialistic and nominalist, will we not want to stir
              things up so that there is no way at all to distinguish the cream from the
              milk, the conceptual and philosophical from the empirical and historical?7
                 As a good materialist and nominalist, I am obviously sympathetic to this
              line of thought. But as an amateur of Geistesgeschichte I want to resist it. I
              am all for getting rid of canons which have become merely quaint, but I do
              not think that we can get along without canons. This is because we cannot
              get along without heroes. We need mountain peaks to look up towards. We
              need to tell ourselves detailed stories about the mighty dead in order to
              make our hopes of surpassing them concrete. We also need the idea that
              there is such a thing as 'philosophy' in the honorific sense - the idea that
              there are, had we but the wit to pose them, certain questions which
              everybody should always have been asking. We cannot give up this idea
              without giving up the notion that the intellectuals of the previous epochs of
              European history form a community, a community of which it is good to
              be a member. If we are to persist in this image of ourselves, then we have to
              have both imaginary conversations with the dead and the conviction that
              we have seen further than they. That means that we need Geistesgeschichte,
              self-justificatory conversations. The alternative is the attempt which Fou-cault once adumbrated but which he has, I hope, given up - the attempt to
              have no face, to transcend the community of the European intellectuals by
              affecting a context-less anonymity, like those characters in Beckett who
              have given up self-justification, conversational interchange, and hope. If
              one does wish to make such an attempt, of course, then Geistesgeschichte -
              even the sort of materialistic, nominalistic, entzauberte Geistesgeschichte I
              am attributing to Foucault - is one of the first things one has to get rid of. I
              have been writing on the assumption that we do not want to make this
               attempt, but rather want to make our conversation with the dead richer and
              fuller.
                  On this assumption, what we need is to see the history of philosophy as
               the story of the people who made splendid but largely unsuccessful
                    One expression of this sceptical line of thought is Jonathan Ree's polemic against the role of
                    'the idea of the History of Philosophy' in presenting 'philosophy as a self-contained,
                    eternal sector of intellectual production' and as having 'a history of its own going back like
                    a tunnel through the centuries' (Ree 1978:32). I entirely agree with Ree, but think that one
                    can avoid this myth, while continuing the three genres I have commended, simply by self-consciously using 'philosophy' as an honorific rather than a descriptive term.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Sussex Library, on 25 Jul 2018 at 13:50:46, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. Cambridge University Press, 2010

=== p. 26 ===

              attempts to ask the questions which we ought to be asking. These will be
              the people who are candidates for a canon - a list of authors whom one
              would be well advised to read before trying to figure out what questions are
              the philosophical ones, in the honorific sense of 'philosophy'. Obviously,
              any given candidate may or may not share the concerns of this or that
              group of contemporary philosophers. One will not be in a position to
              know whether this is his fault, or the fault of the group in question, until
              one has read all the other candidates and settled on one's own canon - told
              one's own Geistesgeschichte. The more intellectual history we can get, of
              the kind which does not worry about what questions are philosophical and
              who counts as a philosopher, the better our chances of having a suitably
              large list of candidates for a canon. The more various the canons we adopt-the more competing Geistesgeschichten we have at hand - the more likely
              we are to reconstruct, first rationally and then historically, interesting
              thinkers. As this competition grows more intense, the tendency to write
              doxographies will be less strong, and this will be all to the good. The
              competition is not likely ever to be resolved, but as long as it continues we
              shall not lose that sense of community which only impassioned conversation makes possible.8

                                                        REFERENCES
               Ayer, A. J. 1936. Language, Truth and Logic. London: Gollancz
               Ayers, Michael. 1978. * Analytical philosophy and the history of philosophy', in
                  Jonathan Ree, Michael Ayers and Adam Westoby, Philosophy and its Past.
                   Brighton: Harvester Press
               Bennett, Jonathan. 1971. Locke, Berkeley, Hume: Central Themes. Oxford:
                      Oxford University Press
               Dunn, John. 1980. Political Obligation in its Historical Context. Cambridge:
                    Cambridge University Press
               Fiering, Norman. 1981. Moral Philosophy at Seventeenth-Century Harvard: A
                    Discipline in Transition. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press
               Heidegger, M. 1973. 'Sketches for a history of being', in The End of Philosophy,
                    trans. Joan Stambaugh. New York: Harper & Row
               Hirsch, E. D., Jr. 1976. The Aims of Interpretation. Chicago: University of
                    Chicago Press
               Ree, Jonathan. 1978. 'Philosophy and the history of philosophy', in Jonathan Ree,
                    Michael Ayers and Adam Westoby, Philosophy and its Past. Brighton:
                    Harvester Press
               Rorty, Richard. 1982. Consequences of Pragmatism. Minneapolis: University of
                    Minnesota Press
                    I am grateful to David Hollinger for helpful remarks on an earlier version of this paper, and
                    to the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences for providing ideal circumstances for its composition.

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Sussex Library, on 25 Jul 2018 at 13:50:46, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. Cambridge University Press, 2010

=== p. 27 ===

                                   The historiography of philosophy: four genres                                      75
              Ryle, Gilbert, 1971. Collected Papers, vol. 1. London: Hutchison
              Skinner, Quentin. 1969. 'Meaning and understanding in the history of ideas',
                  History and Theory 8: 3-53
              Strawson, P. F. 1966. The Bounds of Sense: An Essay on Kant's 'Critique of Pure
                  Reason3. London: Methuen
              Thompson, E. P. 1963. The Making of the English Working Class. Baltimore:
                  Penguin Books

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Sussex Library, on 25 Jul 2018 at 13:50:46, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. Cambridge University Press, 2010

=== p. 28 ===

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Sussex Library, on 25 Jul 2018 at 13:50:46, subject to the Cambridge Core
terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. Cambridge University Press, 2010

