=== chunk: dennett-2013-intuition-pumps/part-ii-thinking-tools ===
title: Part II — A Dozen General Thinking Tools (Chs. 1–12)
source_pdf: docs/sources/dennett-2013-intuition-pumps/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 23-59
page_scheme: pdf
plan_page_start: 23
plan_page_end: 59
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 23 ===

                                                             II.
                                                A DOZEN GENERAL
                                                 THINKING TOOLS

Most of the thinking tools in this book are quite specialized, made to order
for application to a particular topic and even a particular controversy
within the topic. But before we turn to these intuition pumps, here are a few
general-purpose thinking tools, ideas and practices that have proved
themselves in a wide variety of contexts.

=== p. 24 ===

1. MAKING MISTAKES

         He who says “Better to go without belief forever than believe a
         lie!” merely shows his own preponderant private horror of
         becoming a dupe. . . . It is like a general informing his soldiers
         that it is better to keep out of battle forever than to risk a single
         wound. Not so are victories either over enemies or over nature
         gained. Our errors are surely not such awfully solemn things. In a
         world where we are so certain to incur them in spite of all our
         caution, a certain lightness of heart seems healthier than this
         excessive nervousness on their behalf.
                                     —WILLIAM JAMES, “The Will to Believe”
         If you’ve made up your mind to test a theory, or you want to
         explain some idea, you should always decide to publish it
         whichever way it comes out. If we only publish results of a
         certain kind, we can make the argument look good. We must
         publish both kinds of results.
              —RICHARD FEYNMAN, “Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman!”

Scientists often ask me why philosophers devote so much of their effort to
teaching and learning the history of their field. Chemists typically get by
with only a rudimentary knowledge of the history of chemistry, picked up
along the way, and many molecular biologists, it seems, are not even
curious about what happened in biology before about 1950. My answer is
that the history of philosophy is in large measure the history of very smart
people making very tempting mistakes, and if you don’t know the history,
you are doomed to making the same darn mistakes all over again. That’s
why we teach the history of the field to our students, and scientists who
blithely ignore philosophy do so at their own risk. There is no such thing as
philosophy-free science, just science that has been conducted without any
consideration of its underlying philosophical assumptions. The smartest or
luckiest of the scientists sometimes manage to avoid the pitfalls quite
adroitly (perhaps they are “natural born philosophers”—or are as smart as
they think they are), but they are the rare exceptions. Not that professional

=== p. 25 ===

philosophers don’t make—and even defend—the old mistakes too. If the
questions weren’t hard, they wouldn’t be worth working on.
   Sometimes you don’t just want to risk making mistakes; you actually
want to make them—if only to give you something clear and detailed to
fix. Making mistakes is the key to making progress. Of course there are
times when it is really important not to make any mistakes—ask any
surgeon or airline pilot. But it is less widely appreciated that there are also
times when making mistakes is the only way to go. Many of the students
who arrive at very competitive universities pride themselves in not making
mistakes—after all, that’s how they’ve come so much farther than their
classmates, or so they have been led to believe. I often find that I have to
encourage them to cultivate the habit of making mistakes, the best learning
opportunities of all. They get “writer’s block” and waste hours forlornly
wandering back and forth on the starting line. “Blurt it out!” I urge them.
Then they have something on the page to work with.
   We philosophers are mistake specialists. (I know, it sounds like a bad
joke, but hear me out.) While other disciplines specialize in getting the
right answers to their defining questions, we philosophers specialize in all
the ways there are of getting things so mixed up, so deeply wrong, that
nobody is even sure what the right questions are, let alone the answers.
Asking the wrongs questions risks setting any inquiry off on the wrong
foot. Whenever that happens, this is a job for philosophers! Philosophy—in
every field of inquiry—is what you have to do until you figure out what
questions you should have been asking in the first place. Some people hate
it when that happens. They would rather take their questions off the rack,
all nicely tailored and pressed and cleaned and ready to answer. Those who
feel that way can do physics or mathematics or history or biology. There’s
plenty of work for everybody. We philosophers have a taste for working on
the questions that need to be straightened out before they can be answered.
It’s not for everyone. But try it, you might like it.
   In the course of this book I am going to jump vigorously on what I claim
are other people’s mistakes, but I want to assure you that I am an
experienced mistake-maker myself. I’ve made some dillies, and hope to
make a lot more. One of my goals in this book is to help you make good
mistakes, the kind that light the way for everybody.
   First the theory, and then the practice. Mistakes are not just opportunities
for learning; they are, in an important sense, the only opportunity for

=== p. 26 ===

learning or making something truly new. Before there can be learning, there
must be learners. There are only two non-miraculous ways for learners to
come into existence: they must either evolve or be designed and built by
learners that evolved. Biological evolution proceeds by a grand, inexorable
process of trial and error—and without the errors the trials wouldn’t
accomplish anything. As Gore Vidal once said, “It is not enough to succeed.
Others must fail.” Trials can be either blind or foresighted. You, who know
a lot, but not the answer to the question at hand, can take leaps—
foresighted leaps. You can look before you leap, and hence be somewhat
guided from the outset by what you already know. You need not be guessing
at random, but don’t look down your nose at random guesses; among its
wonderful products is . . . you!
   Evolution is one of the central themes of this book, as of all my books,
for the simple reason that it is the central, enabling process not only of life
but also of knowledge and learning and understanding. If you attempt to
make sense of the world of ideas and meanings, free will and morality, art
and science and even philosophy itself without a sound and quite detailed
knowledge of evolution, you have one hand tied behind your back. Later,
we will look at some tools designed to help you think about some of the
more challenging questions of evolution, but here we need to lay a
foundation. For evolution, which knows nothing, the steps into novelty are
blindly taken by mutations, which are random copying “errors” in DNA.
Most of these typographical errors are of no consequence, since nothing
reads them! They are as inconsequential as the rough drafts you didn’t, or
don’t, hand in to the teacher for grading. The DNA of a species is rather
like a recipe for building a new body, and most of the DNA is never
actually consulted in the building process. (It is often called “junk DNA”
for just that reason.) In the DNA sequences that do get read and acted upon
during development, the vast majority of mutations are harmful; many, in
fact, are swiftly fatal. Since the majority of “expressed” mutations are
deleterious, the process of natural selection actually works to keep the
mutation rate very low. Each of you has very, very good copying machinery
in your cells. For instance, you have roughly a trillion cells in your body,
and each cell has either a perfect or an almost perfect copy of your genome,
over three billion symbols long, the recipe for you that first came into
existence when your parents’ egg and sperm joined forces. Fortunately, the
copying machinery does not achieve perfect success, for if it did, evolution

=== p. 27 ===

would eventually grind to a halt, its sources of novelty dried up. Those tiny
blemishes, those “imperfections” in the process, are the source of all the
wonderful design and complexity in the living world. (I can’t resist adding:
if anything deserves to be called Original Sin, these copying mistakes do.)
   The chief trick to making good mistakes is not to hide them—especially
not from yourself. Instead of turning away in denial when you make a
mistake, you should become a connoisseur of your own mistakes, turning
them over in your mind as if they were works of art, which in a way they
are. The fundamental reaction to any mistake ought to be this: “Well, I
won’t do that again!” Natural selection doesn’t actually think the thought;
it just wipes out the goofers before they can reproduce; natural selection
won’t do that again, at least not as often. Animals that can learn—learn not
to make that noise, touch that wire, eat that food—have something with a
similar selective force in their brains. (B. F. Skinner and the behaviorists
understood the need for this and called it “reinforcement” learning; that
response is not reinforced and suffers “extinction.”) We human beings
carry matters to a much more swift and efficient level. We can actually
think the thought, reflecting on what we have just done: “Well, I won’t do
that again!” And when we reflect, we confront directly the problem that
must be solved by any mistake-maker: what, exactly, is that? What was it
about what I just did that got me into all this trouble? The trick is to take
advantage of the particular details of the mess you’ve made, so that your
next attempt will be informed by it and not just another blind stab in the
dark.
   We have all heard the forlorn refrain “Well, it seemed like a good idea at
the time!” This phrase has come to stand for the rueful reflection of an
idiot, a sign of stupidity, but in fact we should appreciate it as a pillar of
wisdom. Any being, any agent, who can truly say, “Well, it seemed like a
good idea at the time!” is standing on the threshold of brilliance. We human
beings pride ourselves on our intelligence, and one of its hallmarks is that
we can remember our previous thinking, and reflect on it—on how it
seemed, on why it was tempting in the first place, and then about what went
wrong. I know of no evidence to suggest that any other species on the
planet can actually think this thought. If they could, they would be almost
as smart as we are.
   So when you make a mistake, you should learn to take a deep breath, grit
your teeth, and then examine your own recollections of the mistake as

=== p. 28 ===

ruthlessly and as dispassionately as you can manage. It’s not easy. The
natural human reaction to making a mistake is embarrassment and anger
(we are never angrier than when we are angry at ourselves), and you have to
work hard to overcome these emotional reactions. Try to acquire the weird
practice of savoring your mistakes, delighting in uncovering the strange
quirks that led you astray. Then, once you have sucked out all the goodness
to be gained from having made them, you can cheerfully set them behind
you, and go on to the next big opportunity. But that is not enough: you
should actively seek out opportunities to make grand mistakes, just so you
can then recover from them.
    At its simplest, this is a technique we all learned in grade school. Recall
how strange and forbidding long division seemed at first: You were
confronted by two imponderably large numbers, and you had to figure out
how to start. Does the divisor go into the dividend six or seven or eight
times? Who knew? You didn’t have to know; you just had to take a stab at
it, whichever number you liked, and check out the result. I remember being
almost shocked when I was told I should start by just “making a guess.”
Wasn’t this mathematics? You weren’t supposed to play guessing games in
such a serious business, were you? But eventually I appreciated, as we all
do, the beauty of the tactic. If the chosen number turned out to be too small,
you increased it and started over; if too large, you decreased it. The good
thing about long division was that it always worked, even if you were
maximally stupid in making your first choice, in which case it just took a
little longer.
    This general technique of making a more-or-less educated guess,
working out its implications, and using the result to make a correction for
the next phase has found many applications. A key element of this tactic is
making a mistake that is clear and precise enough to have definite
implications. Before GPS came along, navigators used to determine their
position at sea by first making a guess about where they were (they made a
guess about exactly what their latitude and longitude were), and then
calculating exactly how high in the sky the sun would appear to be if that
were—by an incredible coincidence—their actual position. When they used
this method, they didn’t expect to hit the nail on the head. They didn’t have
to. Instead they then measured the actual elevation angle of the sun
(exactly) and compared the two values. With a little more trivial
calculation, this told them how big a correction, and in what direction, to

=== p. 29 ===

make to their initial guess.1 In such a method it is useful to make a pretty
good guess the first time, but it doesn’t matter that it is bound to be
mistaken; the important thing is to make the mistake, in glorious detail, so
there is something serious to correct. (A GPS device uses the same guessand-fix-it strategy to locate itself relative to the overhead satellites.)
   The more complex a problem you’re facing, of course, the more difficult
the analysis is. This is known to researchers in artificial intelligence (AI) as
the problem of “credit assignment” (it could as well be called blame
assignment). Figuring out what to credit and what to blame is one of the
knottiest problems in AI, and it is also a problem faced by natural
selection. Every organism on the earth dies sooner or later after one
complicated life story or another. How on earth could natural selection see
through the fog of all these details in order to figure out what positive
factors to “reward” with offspring and what negative factors to “punish”
with childless death? Can it really be that some of our ancestors’ siblings
died childless because their eyelids were the wrong shape? If not, how
could the process of natural selection explain why our eyelids came to have
the excellent shapes they have? Part of the answer is familiar: following the
old adage “If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it,” leave almost all your old,
conservative design solutions in place and take your risks with a safety net
in place. Natural selection automatically conserves whatever has worked up
to now, and fearlessly explores innovations large and small; the large ones
almost always lead immediately to death. A terrible waste, but nobody’s
counting. Our eyelids were mostly designed by natural selection long
before there were human beings or even primates or even mammals.
They’ve had more than a hundred million years to reach the shape they are
today, with only a few minor touch-ups in the last six million years, since
we shared a common ancestor with the chimpanzees and the bonobos.
Another part of the answer is that natural selection works with large
numbers of cases, where even minuscule advantages show up statistically
and can be automatically accumulated. (Other parts of the answer are
technicalities beyond this elementary discussion.)
   Here is a technique that card magicians—at least the best of them—
exploit with amazing results. (I don’t expect to incur the wrath of the
magicians for revealing this trick to you, since this is not a particular trick
but a deep general principle.) A good card magician knows many tricks that
depend on luck—they don’t always work, or even often work. There are

=== p. 30 ===

some effects—they can hardly be called tricks—that might work only once
in a thousand times! Here is what you do: You start by telling the audience
you are going to perform a trick, and without telling them what trick you
are doing, you go for the one-in-a-thousand effect. It almost never works,
of course, so you glide seamlessly into a second try—for an effect that
works about one time in a hundred, perhaps—and when it too fails (as it
almost always will), you slide gracefully into effect number 3, which works
only about one time in ten, so you’d better be ready with effect number 4,
which works half the time (let’s say). If all else fails (and by this time,
usually one of the earlier safety nets will have kept you out of this worst
case), you have a failsafe effect, which won’t impress the crowd very much
but at least it’s a surefire trick. In the course of a whole performance, you
will be very unlucky indeed if you always have to rely on your final safety
net, and whenever you achieve one of the higher-flying effects, the
audience will be stupefied. “Impossible! How on earth could you have
known which was my card?” Aha! You didn’t know, but you had a cute way
of taking a hopeful stab in the dark that paid off. By hiding all the
“mistake” cases from view—the trials that didn’t pan out—you create a
“miracle.”
   Evolution works the same way: all the dumb mistakes tend to be
invisible, so all we see is a stupendous string of triumphs. For instance, the
vast majority—way over 90 percent—of all the creatures that have ever
lived died childless, but not a single one of your ancestors suffered that
fate. Talk about a line of charmed lives!
   One big difference between the discipline of science and the discipline of
stage magic is that while magicians conceal their false starts from the
audience as best they can, in science you make your mistakes in public.
You show them off so that everybody can learn from them. This way, you
get the benefit of everybody else’s experience, and not just your own
idiosyncratic path through the space of mistakes. (The physicist Wolfgang
Pauli famously expressed his contempt for the work of a colleague as “not
even wrong.” A clear falsehood shared with critics is better than vague
mush.) This, by the way, is another reason why we humans are so much
smarter than every other species. It is not so much that our brains are
bigger or more powerful, or even that we have the knack of reflecting on
our own past errors, but that we share the benefits that our individual brains
have won by their individual histories of trial and error.2

=== p. 31 ===

   I am amazed at how many really smart people don’t understand that you
can make big mistakes in public and emerge none the worse for it. I know
distinguished researchers who will go to preposterous lengths to avoid
having to acknowledge that they were wrong about something. They have
never noticed, apparently, that the earth does not swallow people up when
they say, “Oops, you’re right. I guess I made a mistake.” Actually, people
love it when somebody admits to making a mistake. All kinds of people
love pointing out mistakes. Generous-spirited people appreciate your
giving them the opportunity to help, and acknowledging it when they
succeed in helping you; mean-spirited people enjoy showing you up. Let
them! Either way we all win.
   Of course, in general, people do not enjoy correcting the stupid mistakes
of others. You have to have something worth correcting, something original
to be right or wrong about, something that requires constructing the sort of
pyramid of risky thinking we saw in the card magician’s tricks. Carefully
building on the works of others, you can get yourself cantilevered out on a
limb of your own. And then there’s a surprise bonus: if you are one of the
big risk-takers, people will get a kick out of correcting your occasional
stupid mistakes, which show that you’re not so special, you’re a regular
bungler like the rest of us. I know extremely careful philosophers who have
never—apparently—made a mistake in their work. They tend not to get a
whole lot accomplished, but what little they produce is pristine, if not
venturesome. Their specialty is pointing out the mistakes of others, and this
can be a valuable service, but nobody excuses their minor errors with a
friendly chuckle. It is fair to say, unfortunately, that their best work often
gets overshadowed and neglected, drowned out by the passing bandwagons
driven by bolder thinkers. In chapter 76 we’ll see that the generally good
practice of making bold mistakes has other unfortunate side effects as well.
Meta-advice: don’t take any advice too seriously!

1 This doesn’t give navigators their actual position, a point on the globe, but it does give them a
line. They are somewhere on that line of position (LOP). Wait a few hours until the sun has moved
on quite a bit. Then choose a point on your LOP, any point, and calculate how high the sun would
be now if that point were exactly the right choice. Make the observation, compare the results,
apply the correction, and get another LOP. Where it crosses your first LOP is the point where you
are. The sun will have changed not only its height but also its compass bearing during those hours
so the lines will cross at a pretty good angle. In practice, you are usually moving during those few
hours, so you advance your first LOP in the direction you are moving by calculating your speed
and drawing an advanced LOP parallel to the original LOP. In real life everything has a bit of slop
in it, so you try to get three different LOPs. If they all intersect in exactly the same point, you’re

=== p. 32 ===

either incredibly good or incredibly lucky, but more commonly they form a small triangle, called a
cocked hat. You consider yourself in the middle of the cocked hat, and that’s your new calculated
position.
2 That is the ideal, but we don’t always live up to it, human nature being what it is. One of the
recognized but unsolved problems with current scientific practice is that negative results—
experiments that didn’t uncover what they were designed to uncover—are not published often
enough. This flaw in the system is famously explored and deplored in Feynman’s “Cargo Cult
Lecture,” a commencement address he gave at Caltech in 1974, reprinted in Feynman, 1985.

=== p. 33 ===

2. “BY PARODY OF REASONING”:
USING REDUCTIO AD ABSURDUM

The crowbar of rational inquiry, the great lever that enforces consistency, is
reductio ad absurdum—literally, reduction (of the argument) to absurdity.
You take the assertion or conjecture at issue and see if you can pry any
contradictions (or just preposterous implications) out of it. If you can, that
proposition has to be discarded or sent back to the shop for retooling. We
do this all the time without bothering to display the underlying logic: “If
that’s a bear, then bears have antlers!” or “He won’t get here in time for
supper unless he can fly like Superman.” When the issue is a tricky
theoretical controversy, the crowbar gets energetically wielded, but here the
distinction between fair criticism and refutation by caricature is hard to
draw. Can your opponent really be so stupid as to believe the proposition
you have just reduced to absurdity with a few deft moves? I once graded a
student paper that had a serendipitous misspelling, replacing “parity” with
“parody,” creating the delicious phrase “by parody of reasoning,” a handy
name, I think, for misbegotten reductio ad absurdum arguments, which are
all too common in the rough-and-tumble of scientific and philosophical
controversy.
   I recall attending a seminar on cognitive science at MIT some years ago,
conducted by the linguist Noam Chomsky and the philosopher Jerry Fodor,
in which the audience was regularly regaled with hilarious refutations of
cognitive scientists from elsewhere who did not meet with their approval.
On this day, Roger Schank, the director of Yale University’s artificial
intelligence laboratory, was the bête noir, and if you went by Chomsky’s
version, Schank had to be some kind of flaming idiot. I knew Roger and his
work pretty well, and though I had disagreements of my own with it, I
thought that Noam’s version was hardly recognizable, so I raised my hand
and suggested that perhaps he didn’t appreciate some of the subtleties of
Roger’s position. “Oh no,” Noam insisted, chuckling. “This is what he
holds!” And he went back to his demolition job, to the great amusement of
those in the room. After a few more minutes of this I intervened again. “I
have to admit,” I said, “that the views you are criticizing are simply
preposterous,” and Noam grinned affirmatively, “but then what I want to

=== p. 34 ===

know is why you’re wasting your time and ours criticizing such junk.” It
was a pretty effective pail of cold water.
   What about my own reductios of the views of others? Have they been
any fairer? Here are a few to consider. You decide. The French
neuroscientist Jean-Pierre Changeux and I once debated neuroscientist Sir
John Eccles and philosopher Sir Karl Popper about consciousness and the
brain at a conference in Venice. Changeux and I were the materialists (who
maintain that the mind is the brain), and Popper and Eccles the dualists
(who claim that a mind is not a material thing like a brain, but some other,
second kind of entity that interacts with the brain). Eccles had won the
Nobel Prize many years earlier for the discovery of the synapse, the
microscopic gap between neurons that glutamate molecules and other
neurotransmitters and neuromodulators cross trillions of times a day.
According to Eccles, the brain was like a mighty pipe organ and the
trillions of synapses composed the keyboards. The immaterial mind—the
immortal soul, according to Eccles, a devout Catholic—played the
synapses by somehow encouraging quantum-level nudges of the glutamate
molecules. “Forget all that theoretical discussion of neural networks and
the like; it’s irrelevant rubbish,” he said. “The mind is in the glutamate!”
When it was my turn to speak, I said I wanted to be sure I had understood
his position. If the mind was in the glutamate and I poured a bowl of
glutamate down the drain, would that not be murder? “Well,” he replied,
somewhat taken aback, “it would be very hard to tell, wouldn’t it?”1
   You would think that Sir John Eccles, the Catholic dualist, and Francis
Crick, the atheist materialist, would have very little in common, aside from
their Nobel Prizes. But at least for a while their respective views of
consciousness shared a dubious oversimplification. Many nonscientists
don’t appreciate how wonderful oversimplifications can be in science; they
can cut through the hideous complexity with a working model that is
almost right, postponing the messy details until later. Arguably the best use
of “over”-simplification in the history of science was the end run by Crick
and James Watson to find the structure of DNA while Linus Pauling and
others were trudging along trying to make sense of all the details. Crick
was all for trying the bold stroke just in case it solved the problem in one
fell swoop, but of course that doesn’t always work. I was once given the
opportunity to demonstrate this at one of Crick’s famous teas at La Jolla.
These afternoon sessions were informal lab meetings where visitors could

=== p. 35 ===

raise issues and participate in the general discussion. On this particular
occasion Crick made a bold pronouncement: it had recently been shown
that neurons in cortical area V4 “cared about” (responded differentially to)
color. And then he proposed a strikingly simple hypothesis: the conscious
experience of red, for instance, was activity in the relevant red-sensitive
neurons of that retinal area. Hmm, I wondered. “Are you saying, then, that
if we were to remove some of those red-sensitive neurons and keep them
alive in a petri dish, and stimulate them with a microelectrode, there would
be consciousness of red in the petri dish?” One way of responding to a
proffered reductio is to grasp the nettle and endorse the conclusion, a move
I once dubbed outsmarting, since the Australian philosopher J. J. C. Smart
was famous for saying that yes, according to his theory of ethics, it was
sometimes right to frame and hang an innocent man! Crick decided to
outsmart me. “Yes! It would be an isolated instance of consciousness of
red!” Whose consciousness of red? He didn’t say. He later refined his
thinking on this score, but still, he and neuroscientist Christof Koch, in
their quest for what they called the NCC (the neural correlates of
consciousness), never quite abandoned their allegiance to this idea.
   Perhaps yet another encounter will bring out better what is problematic
about the idea of a smidgen of consciousness in a dish. The physicist and
mathematician Roger Penrose and the anesthesiologist Stuart Hameroff
teamed up to produce a theory of consciousness that depended, not on
glutamate, but on quantum effects in the microtubules of neurons.
(Microtubules are tubular protein chains that serve as girders and highways
inside the cytoplasm of all cells, not just neurons.) At Tucson II, the second
international conference on the science of consciousness, after Hameroff’s
exposition of this view, I asked from the audience, “Stuart, you’re an
anesthesiologist; have you ever assisted in one of those dramatic surgeries
that replaces a severed hand or arm?” No, he had not, but he knew about
them. “Tell me if I’m missing something, Stuart, but given your theory, if
you were the anesthesiologist in such an operation you would feel morally
obliged to anesthetize the severed hand as it lay on its bed of ice, right?
After all, the microtubules in the nerves of the hand would be doing their
thing, just like the microtubules in the rest of the nervous system, and that
hand would be in great pain, would it not?” The look on Stuart’s face
suggested that this had never occurred to him. The idea that consciousness
(of red, of pain, of anything) is some sort of network property, something

=== p. 36 ===

that involves coordinated activities in myriads of neurons, initially may not
be very attractive, but these attempts at reductios may help people see why
it should be taken seriously.

1 My other indelible memory of that conference was of Popper’s dip in the Grand Canal. He
slipped getting out of the motorboat at the boathouse of the Isola di San Giorgio and fell feet first
into the canal, submerged up to his knees before being plucked out and set on the pier by two
nimble boatmen. The hosts were mortified and ready to rush back to the hotel to get nonagenarian
Sir Karl a dry pair of trousers, but the pants he was wearing was the only pair he’d brought—and
he was scheduled to lead off the conference in less than half an hour! Italian ingenuity took over,
and within about five minutes I enjoyed an unforgettable sight: Sir Karl, sitting regally on a small
chair in the exact middle of a marble-floored, domed room (Palladio designed it) surrounded by at
least half a dozen young women in miniskirts, on their knees, plying his trouser legs with their
hairdryers. The extension cords stretched radially to the walls, making of the tableau a sort of
multicolored human daisy, with Sir Karl, unperturbed but unsmiling, in the center. Fifteen minutes
later he was dry and pounding his fist on the podium to add emphasis to his dualistic vision.

=== p. 37 ===

3. RAPOPORT’S RULES

Just how charitable are you supposed to be when criticizing the views of an
opponent? If there are obvious contradictions in the opponent’s case, then
of course you should point them out, forcefully. If there are somewhat
hidden contradictions, you should carefully expose them to view—and then
dump on them. But the search for hidden contradictions often crosses the
line into nitpicking, sea-lawyering,1 and—as we have seen—outright
parody. The thrill of the chase and the conviction that your opponent has to
be harboring a confusion somewhere encourages uncharitable
interpretation, which gives you an easy target to attack. But such easy
targets are typically irrelevant to the real issues at stake and simply waste
everybody’s time and patience, even if they give amusement to your
supporters. The best antidote I know for this tendency to caricature one’s
opponent is a list of rules promulgated many years ago by the social
psychologist and game theorist Anatol Rapoport (creator of the winning
Tit-for-Tat strategy in Robert Axelrod’s legendary prisoner’s dilemma
tournament).2
How to compose a successful critical commentary:

1. You should attempt to re-express your target’s position so clearly,
  vividly, and fairly that your target says, “Thanks, I wish I’d thought of
  putting it that way.”
2. You should list any points of agreement (especially if they are not
  matters of general or widespread agreement).
3. You should mention anything you have learned from your target.
4. Only then are you permitted to say so much as a word of rebuttal or
  criticism.
One immediate effect of following these rules is that your targets will be a
receptive audience for your criticism: you have already shown that you
understand their positions as well as they do, and have demonstrated good
judgment (you agree with them on some important matters and have even
been persuaded by something they said).3

=== p. 38 ===

   Following Rapoport’s Rules is always, for me at least, something of a
struggle. Some targets, quite frankly, don’t deserve such respectful
attention, and—I admit—it can be sheer joy to skewer and roast them. But
when it is called for, and it works, the results are gratifying. I was
particularly diligent in my attempt to do justice to Robert Kane’s (1996)
brand of incompatib ilism (a view about free will with which I profoundly
disagree) in my book Freedom Evolves (2003), and I treasure the response
he wrote to me after I had sent him the draft chapter:
             . . . In fact, I like it a lot, our differences notwithstanding. The
             treatment of my view is extensive and generally fair, far more so
             than one usually gets from critics. You convey the complexity of
             my view and the seriousness of my efforts to address difficult
             questions rather than merely sweeping them under the rug. And
             for this, as well as the extended treatment, I am grateful.
Other recipients of my Rapoport-driven attention have been less cordial.
The fairer the criticism seems, the harder to bear in some cases. It is worth
reminding yourself that a heroic attempt to find a defensible interpretation
of an author, if it comes up empty, can be even more devastating than an
angry hatchet job. I recommend it.

1 Maritime law is notoriously complicated, strewn with hidden traps and escape clauses that only
an expert, a sea lawyer, can keep track of, so sea-lawyering is using technicalities to evade
responsibility or assign blame to others.
2 The Axelrod tournament (Axelrod and Hamilton, 1981; Axelrod, 1984) opened up the
blossoming field of theoretical research on the evolution of altruism. I give an introductory
account in Darwin’s Dangerous Idea (Dennett, 1995, pp. 479–480), and in more recent times
there has been an explosion of variations, both simulations and experiments, in laboratories
around the world. Rapoport’s wonderfully simple implementation of the idea “I won’t hit you if
you don’t hit me” is the seed from which all the later studies and models have grown.
3 The formulation of Rapoport’s Rules here is my own, done from memory of correspondence
with Rapoport many years ago, now apparently lost. Samuel Ruth recently pointed out to me that
the original source of Rapoport’s Rules is in his book Fights, Games, and Debates (1960) and his
paper “Three Modes of Conflict” (1961), which articulates rule 1, attributing it to Carl Rogers, and
variations on the rest of the rules. My version is somewhat more portable and versatile.

=== p. 39 ===

4. STURGEON’S LAW

The science-fiction author Ted Sturgeon, speaking at the World Science
Fiction Convention in Philadelphia in September 1953, said,
          When people talk about the mystery novel, they mention The
          Maltese Falcon and The Big Sleep. When they talk about the
          western, they say there’s The Way West and Shane. But when they
          talk about science fiction, they call it “that Buck Rogers stuff,”
          and they say “ninety percent of science fiction is crud.” Well,
          they’re right. Ninety percent of science fiction is crud. But then
          ninety percent of everything is crud, and it’s the ten percent that
          isn’t crud that is important, and the ten percent of science fiction
          that isn’t crud is as good as or better than anything being written
          anywhere.
Sturgeon’s Law is usually put a little less decorously: Ninety percent of
everything is crap. Ninety percent of experiments in molecular biology, 90
percent of poetry, 90 percent of philosophy books, 90 percent of peer-reviewed articles in mathematics—and so forth—is crap. Is that true? Well,
maybe it’s an exaggeration, but let’s agree that there is a lot of mediocre
work done in every field. (Some curmudgeons say it’s more like 99 percent,
but let’s not get into that game.) A good moral to draw from this
observation is that when you want to criticize a field, a genre, a discipline,
an art form, . . . don’t waste your time and ours hooting at the crap! Go
after the good stuff, or leave it alone. This advice is often ignored by
ideologues intent on destroying the reputation of analytic philosophy,
evolutionary       psychology,     sociology,     cultural     anthropology,
macroeconomics, plastic surgery, improvisational theater, television
sitcoms, philosophical theology, massage therapy, you name it. Let’s
stipulate at the outset that there is a great deal of deplorable, stupid,
second-rate stuff out there, of all sorts. Now, in order not to waste your
time and try our patience, make sure you concentrate on the best stuff you
can find, the flagship examples extolled by the leaders of the field, the
prize-winning entries, not the dregs. Notice that this is closely related to
Rapoport’s Rules: unless you are a comedian whose main purpose is to
make people laugh at ludicrous buffoonery, spare us the caricature. This is

=== p. 40 ===

particularly true, I find, when the target is philosophers. The very best
theories and analyses of any philosopher, from the greatest, most
perceptive sages of ancient Greece to the intellectual heroes of the recent
past (Bertrand Russell, Ludwig Wittgenstein, John Dewey, Jean Paul Sartre
—to name four very different thinkers), can be made to look like utter
idiocy—or tedious nitpicking—with a few deft tweaks. Yuck, yuck. Don’t
do it. The only one you’ll discredit is yourself.

=== p. 41 ===

5. OCCAM’S RAZOR

Attributed to William of Ockham (or Occam), the fourteenth-century
logician and philosopher, this thinking tool is actually a much older rule of
thumb. A Latin name for it is lex parsimoniae, the law of parsimony. It is
usually put into English as the maxim “Do not multiply entities beyond
necessity.” The idea is straightforward: don’t concoct a complicated,
extravagant theory if you’ve got a simpler one (containing fewer
ingredients, fewer entities) that handles the phenomenon just as well. If
exposure to extremely cold air can account for all the symptoms of
frostbite, don’t postulate unobserved “snow germs” or “arctic microbes.”
Kepler’s laws explain the orbits of the planets; we have no need to
hypothesize pilots guiding the planets from control panels hidden under the
surface. This much is uncontroversial, but extensions of the principle have
not always met with agreement.
   Conwy Lloyd Morgan, a nineteenth-century British psychologist,
extended the idea to cover attributions of mentality to animals. Lloyd
Morgan’s Canon of Parsimony advises us not to attribute fancy minds to
insects, fish, and even dolphins, dogs, and cats if their behavior can be
explained in simpler terms:
          In no case is an animal activity to be interpreted in terms of
          higher psychological processes, if it can be fairly interpreted in
          terms of processes which stand lower in the scale of
          psychological evolution and development. [1894, p. 128]
Overused, this can be seen as enjoining us to treat all animals and even
human beings as having brains but no minds. As we shall see, the tensions
that arise when minds are the topic are not well settled by absolute
prohibitions.
   One of the least impressive attempts to apply Occam’s Razor to a gnarly
problem is the claim (and provoked counterclaims) that postulating a God
as creator of the universe is simpler, more parsimonious, than the
alternatives. How could postulating something supernatural and
incomprehensible be parsimonious? It strikes me as the height of
extravagance, but perhaps there are clever ways of rebutting that
suggestion. I don’t want to argue about it; Occam’s Razor is, after all, just a

=== p. 42 ===

rule of thumb, a frequently useful suggestion. The prospect of turning it
into a Metaphysical Principle or Fundamental Requirement of Rationality
that could bear the weight of proving or disproving the existence of God in
one fell swoop is simply ludicrous. It would be like trying to disprove a
theorem of quantum mechanics by showing that it contradicted the axiom
“Don’t put all your eggs in one basket.”
   Some thinkers have carried Occam’s Razor to drastic extremes, using it
to deny the existence of time, matter, numbers, holes, dollars, software, and
so on. One of the earliest ultra-stingy thinkers was the ancient Greek
philosopher Parmenides, whose catalogue of existing things was minimal
indeed. As a student of mine memorably wrote on an exam, “Parmenides is
the one who said, ‘There’s just one thing—and I’m not it.’ ” I hate to say it,
but that does seem to be what Parmenides was trying to tell us. No doubt it
loses something in translation. We philosophers get used to taking such
ideas seriously if only because we never can tell when a “crazy” idea is
going to turn out to be unfairly and unwisely judged, a victim of failure of
imagination.

=== p. 43 ===

6. OCCAM’S BROOM

The molecular biologist Sidney Brenner recently invented a delicious play
on Occam’s Razor, introducing the new term Occam’s Broom, to describe
the process in which inconvenient facts are whisked under the rug by
intellectually dishonest champions of one theory or another. This is our
first boom crutch, an anti-thinking tool, and you should keep your eyes
peeled for it. The practice is particularly insidious when used by
propagandists who direct their efforts at the lay public, because like
Sherlock Holmes’s famous clue about the dog that didn’t bark in the night,
the absence of a fact that has been swept off the scene by Occam’s Broom
is unnoticeable except by experts. For instance, creationists invariably
leave out the wealth of embarrassing evidence that their “theories” can’t
handle, and to a nonbiologist their carefully crafted accounts can be quite
convincing simply because the lay reader can’t see what isn’t there.
   How on earth can you keep on the lookout for something invisible? Get
some help from the experts. Stephen C. Meyer’s Signature in the Cell
(2009) purports to expose the systematic impossibility of life having a
natural (nonsupernatural) origin, and gives what seems—even to a
relatively well-informed reader—to be a fair and exhaustive survey of the
theories and models being worked on around the world, showing how
irredeemably hopeless they all are. So persuasive is Meyer’s case that in
November 2009 the eminent philosopher Thomas Nagel declared it his Best
Book of the Year in London’s Times Literary Supplement, one of the world’s
most influential publications of book reviews! In a spirited correspondence
I had with him after his rave appeared, he demonstrated that he knew quite
a lot about the history of work on the origin of life, enough to think he
could trust his own judgment. And as he noted in a letter to the Times
Literary Supplement (January 1, 2010), “Meyer’s book seems to me to be
written in good faith.” Had Nagel consulted with scientists working in the
field, he would have been able to see Meyer’s exploitation of Occam’s
Broom, whisking inconvenient facts out of view, and he might also have
been dismayed to learn that the experts hadn’t been sent an early copy of
Meyer’s book, as he had, or been asked to referee it before publication.
Learning that the book he admired was a stealth operation might have
shaken his confidence in his judgment, or it might not have. The scientific

=== p. 44 ===

establishment has been known to squelch renegade critics unjustly on
occasion, and perhaps—perhaps—Meyer had no choice but to launch a
sneak attack. But Nagel would have been wise to explore this prospect
warily before committing himself. It is fair to say that the scientists
working on the origin of life do not yet have a secure and agreed-upon
theory, but there is no dearth of candidates, an embarrassment of riches
rather than an almost empty arena.
   Conspiracy theorists are masters of Occam’s Broom, and an instructive
exercise on the Internet is to look up a new conspiracy theory, to see if you
(a nonexpert on the topic) can find the flaws, before looking elsewhere on
the web for the expert rebuttals. When Brenner coined the term, he wasn’t
talking about creationism and conspiracy theories; he was pointing out that
in the heat of battle, even serious scientists sometimes cannot resist
“overlooking” some data that seriously undermine their pet theory. It’s a
temptation to be resisted, no matter what.

=== p. 45 ===

7. USING LAY AUDIENCES AS DECOYS

One good way of preventing people from inadvertently wielding Occam’s
Broom is a technique that I have been recommending for years, and have
several times put to the test—but never as ambitiously as I would like to
do. Unlike the other practices I have been describing, this one takes time
and money to do properly. I hope others will pursue this technique
vigorously and report the results. I have decided to put it here because it
addresses some of the same problems of communication that the other
general tools confront.
   In many fields—not just philosophy—there are controversies that seem
never-ending and partly artifactual: people are talking past one another and
not making the necessary effort to communicate effectively. Tempers flare,
and disrespect and derision start creeping in. People on the sidelines take
sides, even when they don’t fully understand the issues.
   It can get ugly, and it can have a very straightforward cause. When
experts talk to experts, whether they are in the same discipline or not, they
always err on the side of under-explaining. The reason is not far to seek: to
overexplain something to a fellow expert is a very serious insult—“Do I
have to spell it out for you?”—and nobody wants to insult a fellow expert.
So just to be safe, people err on the side of under-explaining. It is not done
deliberately, for the most part, and it is almost impossible to keep from
doing—which is actually a good thing, since being polite in an unstudied
way is a nice character trait in anyone. But this gracious disposition to
assume more understanding than is apt to be present in one’s distinguished
audience has an unfortunate by-product: experts often talk past each other.
   There is no direct cure: entreating all the experts present at a workshop
or conference not to under-explain their positions may be met by earnest
promises, but it won’t work. If anything it will make matters worse since
now people will be particularly sensitive to the issue of inadvertently
insulting somebody. But there is an indirect and quite effective cure: have
all experts present their views to a small audience of curious nonexperts
(here at Tufts I have the advantage of bright undergraduates) while the
other experts listen in from the sidelines. They don’t have to eavesdrop;
this isn’t a devious suggestion. On the contrary, everybody can and should
be fully informed that the point of the exercise is to make it comfortable

=== p. 46 ===

for participants to speak in terms that everybody will understand. By
addressing their remarks to the undergraduates (the decoy audience),
speakers need not worry at all about insulting the experts because they are
not addressing the experts. (I suppose they might worry about insulting the
undergraduates, but that’s another matter.) When all goes well, expert A
explains the issues of the controversy to the undergraduates while expert B
listens. At some point B’s face may light up. “So that’s what you’ve been
trying to say! Now I get it.” Or maybe the good effects will have to wait
until it is B’s turn to explain to the same undergraduates what the issues
are, and provoking just such a welcome reaction in A. It may not go
perfectly, but it usually goes well and everybody benefits. The experts
dissolve some of the artifactual misunderstandings between their positions,
and the undergraduates get a first-rate educational experience.
   Several times I have set up such exercises at Tufts, thanks to generous
support from the administration. I handpick a small group of
undergraduates (less than a dozen) and brief them on their role: they are not
to accept anything they don’t understand. They will be expected to raise
their hands, to interrupt, to alert the experts to anything they find confusing
or vague. (They do get required reading to pore over beforehand so that
they are not utter novices on the topic; they are interested amateurs.) They
love the role, and so they should; they are being given made-to-order
tutorials from some big guns. The experts, meanwhile, often find that being
set the task (well in advance) to explain their position under these
conditions helps them find better ways of making their points than they had
ever found before. Sometimes these experts have been “protected” for
years by layers of fellow experts, postdocs, and advanced graduate
students, and they really need the challenge.

=== p. 47 ===

8. JOOTSING

It is hard to find an application of Occam’s Broom, since it operates by
whisking inconvenient facts out of sight, and it is even harder to achieve
what Doug Hofstadter (1979, 1985) calls jootsing, which stands for
“jumping out of the system.” This is an important tactic not just in science
and philosophy, but also in the arts. Creativity, that ardently sought but only
rarely found virtue, often is a heretofore unimagined violation of the rules
of the system from which it springs. It might be the system of classical
harmony in music, the rules for meter and rhyme in sonnets (or limericks,
even), or the “canons” of taste or good form in some genre of art. Or it
might be the assumptions and principles of some theory or research
program. Being creative is not just a matter of casting about for something
novel—anybody can do that, since novelty can be found in any random
juxtaposition of stuff—but of making the novelty jump out of some system,
a system that has become somewhat established, for good reasons. When an
artistic tradition reaches the point where literally “anything goes,” those
who want to be creative have a problem: there are no fixed rules to rebel
against, no complacent expectations to shatter, nothing to subvert, no
background against which to create something that is both surprising and
yet meaningful. It helps to know the tradition if you want to subvert it.
That’s why so few dabblers or novices succeed in coming up with anything
truly creative.
   Sit down at a piano and try to come up with a good new melody and you
soon discover how hard it is. All the keys are available, in any combination
you choose, but until you can find something to lean on, some style or
genre or pattern to lay down and exploit a bit, or allude to, before you twist
it, you will come up with nothing but noise. And not just any violation of
the rules will do the trick. I know there are at least two flourishing—well,
surviving—jazz harpists, but setting out to make your name playing
Beethoven on tuned bongo drums is probably not a good plan. Here is
where art shares a feature with science: there are always scads of
unexamined presuppositions of any theoretical set-to, but trying to negate
them one at a time until you find a vulnerable one is not a good recipe for
success in science or philosophy. (It would be like taking a Gershwin
melody and altering it, one note at a time, looking for a worthy descendant.

=== p. 48 ===

Good luck! Almost always, mutations are deleterious.) It’s harder than that,
but sometimes you get lucky.
   Advising somebody to make progress by jootsing is rather like advising
an investor to buy low and sell high. Yes, of course, that’s the idea, but how
do you manage to do it? Notice that the investment advice is not entirely
vacuous or unusable, and the call for jootsing is even more helpful, because
it clarifies what your target looks like if you ever catch a glimpse of it.
(Everybody knows what more money looks like.) When you are confronting
a scientific or philosophical problem, the system you need to jump out of is
typically so entrenched that it is as invisible as the air you breathe. As a
general rule, when a long-standing controversy seems to be getting
nowhere, with both “sides” stubbornly insisting they are right, as often as
not the trouble is that there is something they both agree on that is just not
so. Both sides consider it so obvious, in fact, that it goes without saying.
Finding these invisible problem-poisoners is not an easy task, because
whatever seems obvious to these warring experts is apt to seem obvious, on
reflection, to just about everybody. So the recommendation that you keep
an eye out for a tacit shared false assumption is not all that likely to bear
fruit, but at least you’re more likely to find one if you’re hoping to find one
and have some idea of what one would look like.
   Sometimes there are clues. Several of the great instances of jootsing
have involved abandoning some well-regarded thing that turned out not to
exist after all. Phlogiston was supposed to be an element in fire, and
caloric was the invisible, self-repellent fluid or gas that was supposed to be
the chief ingredient in heat, but these were dropped, and so was the ether as
a medium in which light traveled the way sound travels through air and
water. But other admirable jootsings are additions, not subtractions: germs
and electrons and—maybe even—the many-worlds interpretation of
quantum mechanics! It’s never obvious from the outset whether we should
joots or not. Ray Jackendoff and I have argued that we must drop the
almost always tacit assumption that consciousness is the “highest” or
“most central” of all mental phenomena, and I have argued that thinking of
consciousness as a special medium (rather like the ether) into which
contents get transduced or translated is a widespread and unexamined habit
of thought that should be broken. Along with many others, I have also
argued that if you think it is simply obvious that free will and determinism

=== p. 49 ===

are incompatible, you’re making a big mistake. More about those ideas
later.
   Another clue: sometimes a problem gets started when somebody way
back when said, “Suppose, for the sake of argument, that . . . ,” and folks
agreed, for the sake of argument, and then in the subsequent parry and
thrust everybody forgot how the problem started! I think that occasionally,
at least in my field of philosophy, the opponents are enjoying the tussle so
much that neither side wants to risk extinguishing the whole exercise by
examining the enabling premises. Here are two ancient examples, which of
course are controversial: (1) “Why is there something rather than nothing?”
is a deep question in need of an answer. (2) “Does God command
something because it is good, or is something good because God commands
it?” is another important question. I guess it would be wonderful if
somebody came up with a good answer to either of these questions, so I
admit that my calling them pseudo-problems not worth anybody’s attention
is not very satisfying, but that doesn’t show that I’m wrong. Nobody said
the truth had to be fun.

=== p. 50 ===

9. THREE SPECIES OF GOULDING: RATHERING,
PILING ON, AND THE GOULD TWO-STEP

The late biologist Stephen Jay Gould was a virtuoso designer and exploiter
of boom crutches. Here are three related species, of the genus Goulding,
named by me in honor of their most effective wielder.
   Rathering is a way of sliding you swiftly and gently past a false
dichotomy. The general form of a rathering is “It is not the case that
blahblahblah, as orthodoxy would have you believe; it is rather that
suchandsuchandsuch—which is radically different.” Some ratherings are
just fine; you really must choose between the two alternatives on offer; in
these cases, you are not being offered a false, but rather a genuine,
inescapable dichotomy. But some ratherings are little more than sleight of
hand, due to the fact that the word “rather” implies—without argument—
that there is an important incompatibility between the claims flanking it.
   Here is a fine example of rathering by Gould in the course of his account
of punctuated equilibrium:
         Change does not usually occur by imperceptibly gradual
         alteration of entire species but rather [my italics] by isolation of
         small populations and their geologically instantaneous
         transformation into new species. [1992b, p. 12]
This passage invites us to believe that evolutionary change could not be
both “geologically instantaneous” and “imperceptibly gradual” at the same
time. But of course it can be. In fact, that is just what evolutionary change
must be, unless Gould is saying that evolution tends to proceed by
saltations (giant leaps in Design Space)—but elsewhere he has insisted that
he never ever endorsed saltationism. “Geologically instantaneous”
speciation can happen over a “short” period of time—let’s say fifty
thousand years, an elapse of time barely detectable in most geological
strata. During that brief moment a typical member of a species might
increase in height from, say, half a meter to one meter, a 100 percent
increase, but at a rate of a millimeter every century, which strikes me as an
imperceptibly gradual change.
   Let’s make up some other examples of rathering, to make sure the nature
of the trick is clear.

=== p. 51 ===

         It is not that people are mere “moist robots” (as Dilbert says, with
         the concurrence of most researchers in cognitive science); it is
         rather that people have free will, and are morally responsible for
         their good and bad deeds.
Again, why not both? What is missing is an argument to the effect that
“moist robots” cannot also be people with free will who are morally
responsible. This example plays on a common—but controversial—
assumption. Here’s another:
         Religion is not the opiate of the masses, as Marx said; it is rather
         a deep and consoling sign of humanity’s recognition of the
         inevitability of death.
Yet again, why can’t it be both the opiate and a consoling sign? I think you
get the point by now, and you can hunt for ratherings in a document more
easily than you can hunt for false dichotomies, which never get announced
as such; just type “rather” in your search box and see what comes up.
Remember: not all “rather”s are ratherings; some are legitimate. And some
ratherings don’t use the word “rather.” Here is one that uses the terser for
“_______, not_______”; I made it up from elements in the work of several
ideologues of cognitive science.
         Nervous systems need to be seen as actively generating probes of
         their environment, not as mere computers acting passively on
         inputs fed to them by sense organs.
Who says computers acting on inputs fed to them can’t actively generate
probes? This familiar contrast between drearily “passive” computers and
wonderfully “active” organisms has never been properly defended, and is
one of the most ubiquitous imagination-blockers I know.
  A variation on rathering used frequently by Gould may be called piling
on:
         We talk about the “march from monad to man” (old-style
         language again) as though evolution followed continuous
         pathways of progress along unbroken lineages. Nothing could be
         further from reality. [1989a, p. 14]
What could not be further from reality? At first it might appear as if Gould
was saying that there is no continuous, unbroken lineage between the
“monads” (single-celled organisms) and us, but of course there is. There is

=== p. 52 ===

no more secure implication of Darwin’s great idea than that. So what can
Gould be saying here? Presumably we are meant to put the emphasis on
“pathways of progress”—it is (only) the belief in progress that is “far from
reality.” The pathways are continuous, unbroken lineages all right, but not
lineages of (global) progress. This is true: they are (unbroken) continuous
lineages of (mainly) local progress. We come away from this passage from
Gould—unless we are wary—with the sense that he has shown us
something seriously wrong with the standard proposition of evolutionary
theory that there are continuous pathways (unbroken lineages) from
monads to man. But, to use Gould’s own phrase, “Nothing could be further
from reality.”
   Yet another trick of his is the Gould Two-Step, a device I described in
print some years ago, which was then named by the evolutionary theorist
Robert Trivers (personal correspondence, 1993), in honor of its inventor:
         In the first stage, you create the strawperson, and “refute” it
         (everybody knows that trick). Second (this is the stroke of
         genius), you yourself draw attention to the evidence that you have
         taken the first step—the evidence that your opponents don’t in
         fact hold the view you have attributed to them—but interpret
         these citations as their grudging concessions to your attack!
         [Dennett, 1993, p. 43]
   In my essay, a letter to the editor of the New York Review of Books
(1993), where Gould had two months earlier savagely criticized Helena
Cronin’s fine book The Ant and the Peacock (November 19, 1992), I
presented three examples of the Gould Two-Step. Here is the most portable
of those examples:
         The most transparent case is Gould’s invention of
         “extrapolationism,” described as a logical extension of “Cronin’s
         adaptationism.” This is a doctrine of pan-continuity and pan-gradualism that is conveniently—indeed trivially—refuted by the
         fact of mass extinction. “But if mass extinctions are true breaks
         in continuity, if the slow building of adaptation in normal times
         does not extend into predicted success across mass extinction
         boundaries, then extrapolationism fails and adaptationism
         succumbs.” I cannot see why any adaptationist would be so
         foolish as to endorse anything like “extrapolationism” in a form

=== p. 53 ===

         so “pure” as to deny the possibility or even likelihood that mass
         extinction would play a major role in pruning the tree of life, as
         Gould puts it. It has always been obvious that the most perfect
         dinosaur will succumb if a comet strikes its homeland with a
         force hundreds of times greater than all the hydrogen bombs ever
         made. There is not a word in Cronin’s book that supports his
         contention that she has made this error. If Gould thinks the role of
         mass extinctions in evolution is relevant to either of the central
         problems Cronin addresses, sexual selection and altruism, he
         does not say how or why. When Cronin turns, in her last chapter,
         to a fine discussion of the central question in evolutionary theory
         she has not concentrated on, the origin of species, and points out
         that it is still an outstanding problem, Gould pounces on this as a
         last minute epiphany, an ironic admission of defeat for her
         “panadaptationism.” Preposterous! [p. 44]
  There is a good project for a student of rhetoric: combing through
Gould’s huge body of publications and cataloguing the different species of
boom crutch he exploited, beginning with rathering, piling on, and the
Gould Two-Step.

=== p. 54 ===

10. THE “SURELY” OPERATOR: A MENTAL BLOCK

When you’re reading or skimming argumentative essays, especially by
philosophers, here is a quick trick that may save you much time and effort,
especially in this age of simple searching by computer: look for “surely” in
the document, and check each occurrence. Not always, not even most of the
time, but often the word “surely” is as good as a blinking light locating a
weak point in the argument, a warning label about a likely boom crutch.
Why? Because it marks the very edge of what the author is actually sure
about and hopes readers will also be sure about. (If the author were really
sure all the readers would agree, it wouldn’t be worth mentioning.) Being at
the edge, the author has had to make a judgment call about whether or not
to attempt to demonstrate the point at issue, or provide evidence for it, and
—because life is short—has decided in favor of bald assertion, with the
presumably well-grounded anticipation of agreement. Just the sort of place
to find an ill-examined “truism” that isn’t true!
   I first noticed this useful role of “surely” when commenting on an essay
by Ned Block (1994), which included several prime examples directed
against my theory of consciousness. Here’s one, conveniently italicized1 by
Block to emphasize its obviousness typographically:
         But surely it is nothing other than a biological fact about people
         —not a cultural construction—that some brain representations
         persevere enough to affect memory, control behavior, etc. [p. 27]
This is meant to dismiss—without argument—my theory of human
consciousness as something that must, in effect, be learned, a set of
cognitive micro-habits that are not guaranteed to be present at birth.
“Wherever Block says ‘Surely,’ ” I said, “look for what we might call a
mental block” (Dennett, 1994a, p. 549). Block is one of the most profligate
abusers of the “surely” operator among philosophers, but others routinely
rely on it, and every time they do, a little alarm bell should ring. “Here is
where the unintended sleight-of-hand happens, whisking the false premise
by the censors with a nudge and a wink” (Dennett, 2007b, p. 252).
   I decided recently to test my hunch about “surely” a bit more
systematically. I went through dozens of papers—about sixty—on the
philosophy of mind at philpapers.org/ and checked for occurrences of

=== p. 55 ===

“surely.” Most papers did not use the word at all. In those that did use it
(between one and five times in the sample I checked), most instances were
clearly innocent; a few were, well, arguable; and there were six instances
where the alarm bell sounded loud and clear (for me). Of course others
might have a very different threshold for obviousness, which is why I
didn’t bother tabulating my “data” in this informal experiment. I encourage
doubters to conduct their own surveys and see what they find. A
particularly egregious example of the “surely” operator will be dismantled
in detail later, in chapter 64.

1 Not to be outdone, the philosopher Jerry Fodor (2008) has adopted the practice of putting his
“surely”s in italics—and repeating them (e.g., p. 38), as if to say, Take that, doubters! Take that,
doubters!

=== p. 56 ===

11. RHETORICAL QUESTIONS

Just as you should keep a sharp eye out for “surely,” you should develop a
sensitivity for rhetorical questions in any argument or polemic. Why?
Because, like the use of “surely,” they represent an author’s eagerness to
take a short cut. A rhetorical question has a question mark at the end, but it
is not meant to be answered. That is, the author doesn’t bother waiting for
you to answer since the answer is so flipping obvious that you’d be
embarrassed to say it! In other words, most rhetorical questions are
telescoped reductio ad absurdum arguments, too obvious to need spelling
out. Here is a good habit to develop: Whenever you see a rhetorical
question, try—silently, to yourself—to give it an unobvious answer. If you
find a good one, surprise your interlocutor by answering the question. I
remember a Peanuts cartoon from years ago that nicely illustrates the
tactic. Charlie Brown had just asked, rhetorically, “Who’s to say what is
right and wrong here?” and Lucy responded, in the next panel, “I will.”

=== p. 57 ===

12. WHAT IS A DEEPITY?

My late friend, the computer scientist Joseph Weizenbaum had a yearning
to be a philosopher and tried late in his career to gravitate from
technicalities to profundities. He once told me that one evening, after
holding forth with high purpose and furrowed brow at the dinner table, his
young daughter Miriam said, “Wow! Dad just said a deepity!” What a
wonderful impromptu coinage!1 I decided to adopt it and put it to
somewhat more analytic use.
   A deepity is a proposition that seems both important and true—and
profound—but that achieves this effect by being ambiguous. On one
reading it is manifestly false, but it would be earth-shaking if it were true;
on the other reading it is true but trivial. The unwary listener picks up the
glimmer of truth from the second reading, and the devastating importance
from the first reading, and thinks, Wow! That’s a deepity.
   Here is an example. (Better sit down: this is heavy stuff.)
          Love is just a word.
Oh wow! Cosmic. Mind-blowing, right? Wrong. On one reading, it is
manifestly false. I’m not sure what love is—maybe an emotion or
emotional attachment, maybe an interpersonal relationship, maybe the
highest state a human mind can achieve—but we all know it isn’t a word.
You can’t find love in the dictionary!
  We can bring out the other reading by availing ourselves of a convention
philosophers care mightily about: when we talk about a word, we put it in
quotation marks, thus:
          “Love” is just a word.
This is true; “love” is an English word, but just a word, not a sentence, for
example. It begins with “L” and has four letters and appears in the
dictionary between “lousy” and “low-browed,” which are also just words.
“Cheeseburger” is just a word. “Word” is just a word.
  But this isn’t fair, you say. Whoever said that love is just a word meant
something else, surely. No doubt, but they didn’t say it. Maybe they meant
that “love” is a word that misleads people into thinking that it is the term
for something wonderful that doesn’t really exist at all, like “unicorn,” or

=== p. 58 ===

maybe they meant that the word was so vague that nobody could ever know
whether it referred to any particular thing or relation or event. But neither
of these claims is actually very plausible. “Love” may be a troublesome,
hard-to-define word, and love may be a hard-to-be-sure-about state, but
those claims are obvious, not particularly informative or profound.
   Not all deepities are quite so easily analyzed. Richard Dawkins recently
alerted me to a fine deepity by Rowan Williams, the Archbishop of
Canterbury, who described his faith as a
             silent waiting on the truth, pure sitting and breathing in the
             presence of the question mark.
I leave the analysis of this as an exercise for you.

1 Miriam encountered my use of her term on the Internet recently and got in touch with me. Her
own version of its coining is somewhat different, but in the same spirit: “In my family it carries a
bit of scorn—an idea masquerading as Truth in order to elevate the speaker.” She has graciously
consented to my use of the version her father told me (as I recall it), and to my rather narrower
redefinition of her brilliant neologism.

=== p. 59 ===

SUMMARY

A tool wielded well becomes almost as much a part of you as your hands
and feet, and this is especially true of tools for thinking. Equipped with
these simple all-purpose thinking tools, you can approach the difficult
explorations ahead with sharper senses: you can see an opening, hear a
warning bell, smell a rat, or feel a misstep that you might well miss without
their help. You also have some maxims to bear in mind—Rapoport’s Rules
and Sturgeon’s Law, for instance—that can whisper advice in your ear like
Jiminy Cricket, reminding you to control your aggression as you plunge
boldly into the thicket swinging your weapons. Yes, thinking tools are also
weapons, and the imagery of combat is appropriate. Competitiveness is,
apparently, a natural by-product of the intellectual ambition and boldness
required to tackle the toughest problems. We’ve seen that in the heat of
battle even great thinkers can resort to dirty tricks in their eagerness to get
you to see things their way, and constructive criticism can quickly shade
into ridicule when an opportunity to launch a zinger arises.
   The problems we will be confronting are all hot-button issues: meaning,
evolution, consciousness, and especially free will. You will feel dread or
repugnance welling up as you approach some of the prospects, and rest
assured that you are not alone in this; even the most vaunted experts are
susceptible to wishful thinking and can be blinded to a truth by a conviction
that is supported more by emotional attachment than reason. People really
care about whether they have free will or not, about how their minds can
reside in their bodies, and about how—and even whether—there can be
meaning in a world composed of nothing but atoms and molecules, photons
and Higgs bosons. People should care. What could be more important, in
the end, than these questions: What in the world are we, and what should
we do about it? So watch your step. There is treacherous footing ahead, and
the maps are unreliable.

