=== chunk: dennett-2013-intuition-pumps/part-vii-consciousness ===
title: Part VII — Tools for Thinking about Consciousness (Chs. 53–64)
source_pdf: docs/sources/dennett-2013-intuition-pumps/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 248-310
page_scheme: pdf
plan_page_start: 248
plan_page_end: 310
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 248 ===

                                           VII.
        TOOLS FOR THINKING ABOUT CONSCIOUSNESS

Well armed with dozens of thinking tools, we finally arrive at the topic
that many regard as the most puzzling phenomenon in the whole universe.
Indeed not a few folks have claimed that it is terminally mysterious. We
will never ever understand consciousness, they declare; it will
systematically defy the best efforts of our science and philosophy until the
end of time. Since there are no good reasons to believe in this intellectual
roadblock, I have to conclude that it is wishful thinking. Some folks hate
the idea of our uncovering the secrets of how the conscious mind works,
and just to make sure we don’t impose our understanding on them, they
counsel that we give it up as a lost cause. If we take their advice, they will
be right, so let’s ignore them and get on with this difficult, but not
impossible, quest.

=== p. 249 ===

53. TWO COUNTER-IMAGES

Many of the tools I have introduced earlier deal in one way or another with
the mind—believing, thinking, and so forth—but I postponed the knotty
problems of consciousness until now. There is a reason: when people start
musing about consciousness, they have a way of inflating their notions of
what consciousness must be, of bamboozling themselves. They tackle the
hardest issues before they have had a chance to see how much of the work
(and play) of the mind can be accounted for without first settling the
perennial questions about conscious experience. Now that we have built a
base camp, are we ready to tackle the summit? Yes, but if we think of it that
way, we are already making a mistake of imagination! Our minds don’t
have a single magnificent summit, consciousness. Contrary to a tradition
going back at least to Descartes in the seventeenth century, conscious
phenomena are neither the most “central” nor the “highest” phenomena in
our minds (Jackendoff, 1987; Dennett, 1991a). A seductive bad image
needs a counter-image to neutralize it, so here is a simple imagination-adjuster to start us off: recall Cole Porter’s wonderful song “You’re the
Top” and reflect that maybe you’re not the top—not the summit of the
mountain, but the whole mountain, and what you know and can tell about
the mountain that is you is not the view from the summit, but various views
from halfway up. You might like to think of the phenomena of
consciousness as rather like the fringe of hair around a bald man’s pate.
Bear that in mind.
   And here is another: consciousness is not a medium, like television, into
which information can get transduced or recorded, and there is no place in
the brain where “it all comes together” for the appreciation of some Central
Witness—I call this imaginary place the Cartesian Theater (Dennett,
1991a). Consciousness is more like fame than television: fame in the brain,
cerebral celebrity, a way in which some contents come to be more
influential and memorable than the competition. Instead of arguing for this
(for the arguments, see Dennett, 1991a, 2005b), I am simply offering you
this thinking tool, take it or leave it, with some friendly advice: whenever
you find yourself thinking of entry into consciousness as Arrival at
Headquarters or as Translation from unconscious neural spike-signals into

=== p. 250 ===

Something Else, remind yourself of these counter-images and ask yourself
if you might be mis-imagining the phenomena.

=== p. 251 ===

54. THE ZOMBIC HUNCH

Most people have a hunch—it’s no better than that, really—that no robot
(made of silicon and metal and plastic, etc.) could ever be conscious the
way we humans are. There is something about our living, breathing,
organic bodies and brains that is necessary for consciousness. This is an
intuition that hardly needs pumping, so ubiquitous is it, and maybe these
people are right. But now that we have some insight into the way our bodies
and brains can themselves be seen as made of robots made of robots made
of robots, and so on, all the way down to below the neuron level where the
motor proteins and other nanobots trudge along making the whole system
work, we can see that maybe that hunch is just an artifact of impoverished
imagination: folks have been thinking about robots that are too simple, by
many orders of magnitude. A friend once responded to this opening gambit
of mine by trying to nip it in the bud: “I just can’t conceive of a conscious
robot!” Nonsense, I replied. What you mean is that you won’t conceive of a
conscious robot. You think it is silly and preposterous to try to take the idea
seriously. But it’s actually child’s play to conceive of a conscious robot, or,
for that matter, a conscious choo-choo train (The Little Engine That Could)
or a conscious Christmas tree (all those sappy children’s stories about
lonely little fir trees that pine for a home). Anybody who has seen Star
Wars has spent an hour or so conceiving of R2D2 and C3PO as conscious.
We have done this since we were children, “without a second thought” for
the most part. It’s not just easy, it’s almost irresistible when we are
confronted with something that acts—and especially, talks—like a human
being.
   Here’s an interesting fact: since the pioneering work of neuroscientist
Wilder Penfield in Montreal back in the 1950s, there have been many
operations that exposed the brains of wide-awake patients who were able to
say what it was like when their brains were stimulated there or just there. I
don’t think any participant or observer of one of these operations has ever
thought, “Oh my gosh! This isn’t a person. This is a zombie. It has to be,
because when we look inside, all we find is gray matter.” No, it is just too
obvious—look! listen!—that the patient is conscious. And it would be just
as obvious, really, if we were to open up somebody’s skull while he or she
is conversing with us and find the cranial cavity packed with microchips.

=== p. 252 ===

We’d learn, perhaps to our surprise, that a conscious robot was not just easy
to conceive of or imagine, but actual.
   Some philosophers think that your imagination would be playing a trick
on you if you fell for this “merely behavioral” evidence of consciousness
and jumped to that conclusion. “Don’t fall, don’t jump!” might be their
motto. Proving that another person is conscious is much harder than that,
since that person might—it’s at least a logical possibility—be a “zombie.”
Not a voodoo-style zombie of the sort that one sees in movies or dresses up
as at Halloween. The walking dead are readily distinguishable from normal
people by their behavior (and their horrible appearance). Philosophers’
zombies, in contrast, can be delightful company, the life of the party, as
loving and joyous and spontaneous as anybody you know. Some of your
best friends might be zombies. Philosophers’ zombies are (by definition)
behaviorally indistinguishable from normal conscious human beings, but
“there’s nobody home”—they entirely lack any inner life, any conscious
experience. They just appear from the outside to be conscious. If you agree
with these philosophers that this is a serious issue, if you wonder—given
the logical possibility of philosophers’ zombies—how there could ever be a
scientific, materialistic theory of consciousness, then you are gripped by
the Zombic Hunch.1
   Let me acknowledge right away that I can feel the Zombic Hunch as
vividly as anyone. When I squint just right, it does sort of seem that
consciousness must be something in addition to all the things it does for us
and to us, some kind of special private glow or here-I-am-ness that would
be absent in any robot, and that is all but unimaginable as a “mere”
physical activity of the brain. But I’ve learned not to credit the hunch. I
think it is a flat-out mistake, a failure of imagination, not an insight into
necessity. Convincing others of this, however, proves to be no easy task,
and we will need several different intuition pumps to loosen the grip of the
Zombic Hunch.
   To start, we may get our bearings on this logical possibility by
comparing it with a few others. It is logically possible that you are living in
the Matrix, and all of the life you see around you and apparently participate
in is a virtual reality show designed to keep you calm as your actual body
lies motionless in a high-tech pod of some kind. It is logically possible that
there aren’t really any carbon atoms; what appear to scientists to be carbon
atoms are actually kazillions of tiny spaceships piloted by aliens whose life

=== p. 253 ===

work is to pretend that they are carbon atoms. It is logically possible that
the entire universe was created about six thousand years ago, with all the
so-called fossils in place and photons streaming in as if from galaxies
light-years away. (It’s logically possible that the world was created ten
minutes ago, complete with all the purported memories of your past
installed in your brain.) We may find such logical possibilities amusing
premises for fiction, but we don’t take them seriously as signs that our
physics and chemistry and biology need to be overhauled or abandoned. Is
there anything that makes the Zombic Hunch more substantial, more
worthy of consideration? Many serious thinkers have thought so.
   Perhaps the grandfather of all intuition pumps designed to yield
something like the Zombic Hunch was invented hundreds of years ago by
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, the philosopher/mathematician who shares
credit with Isaac Newton for inventing calculus. He was as smart and
ingenious as any thinker in his age, and yet he fell for this intuition pump
of his own devising.
         And supposing there were a machine, so constructed as to think,
         feel, and have perception, it might be conceived as increased in
         size, while keeping the same proportions, so that one might go
         into it as into a mill. That being so, we should, on examining its
         interior, find only parts which work one upon another, and never
         anything by which to explain a perception. Thus [my italics] it is
         in a simple substance, and not in a compound or in a machine,
         that perception must be sought for. [Leibniz, 1714, para. 17]
   This “Thus” is one of the most glaring non sequiturs in all of philosophy.
Leibniz doesn’t give us any intervening argument for the conclusion; he
thinks it is too obvious to need any. Recall William Bateson, the earlytwentieth-century geneticist who couldn’t imagine that genes could be
material entities (see p. 100). Just as Bateson had no way of taking
seriously the extravagant idea of three-billion base-pairs in a double helix
inside every cell (preposterous!), Leibniz had no way of taking seriously
the idea of a “mill” with trillions of moving parts. He would insist, no
doubt, that “just adding more parts” couldn’t take you from machinery to
mind, but that would be only his hunch, not anything he could claim to
demonstrate. But if Darwin, Crick, and Watson have exposed Bateson’s
failure of imagination, Turing has rendered Leibniz’s intuition pump
obsolete. Except that he hasn’t. Not yet. In due course, I think, the Zombic

=== p. 254 ===

Hunch will fade into history, a curious relic of our spirit-haunted past, but I
doubt that it will ever go extinct. It will not survive in its current, mind-besotting form, but it will survive as a less virulent mutation, still
psychologically powerful but stripped of authority. We’ve seen this happen
before. It still seems as if the earth stands still and the sun and moon go
around it, but we have learned that it is wise to disregard this as mere
appearance. It still seems as if there’s a difference between a thing at
absolute rest and a thing that is merely not accelerating within an inertial
frame, but we have learned not to trust this feeling. I anticipate a day when
philosophers and scientists and laypeople will chuckle over the fossil traces
of our earlier bafflement about consciousness: “It still seems as if these
mechanistic theories of consciousness leave something out, but of course
we now understand that that’s an illusion. They do, in fact, explain
everything about consciousness that needs explanation.”
   Continuing allegiance to the Zombic Hunch is actually fostered by many
philosophers’ thought experiments, such as John Searle’s famous Chinese
Room, the inspiration for my coinage, “intuition pump.” It will soon get
dismantled in front of your eyes. But first I want to explore the concept of
philosophical zombies a bit more carefully.

1 One reader of an early draft of this book thought I was making all of this up. If you share that
suspicion, check out the long, deadly serious article on philosophical zombies in the august
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, online at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/zombies/.

=== p. 255 ===

55. ZOMBIES AND ZIMBOES

When people say they can conceive of (philosophical) zombies, we are
entitled to ask them how they know. Conceiving is not easy! Can you
conceive of more than three dimensions? The curvature of space? Quantum
entanglement? Just imagining something is not enough—and in fact,
Descartes tells us, it is not conceiving at all. According to Descartes,
imagining uses your (ultimately mechanistic) body, with all its limitations
(nearsightedness, limited resolution, angle, and depth); conceiving uses just
your mind, which is a much more powerful organ of discernment,
unfettered by the requirements of mechanism. He offers a compelling
example of the difference: the chiliagon, a regular thousand-sided polygon.
Can you conceive of one? Can you imagine one? What is the difference?
Let’s try imagining one first. Start with a pentagon, say, then imagine a
decagon. It’s hard, but you know what to do: bend each side of the pentagon
in the middle and push out a little bit, turning five equal sides into ten. How
far should you push out? Just inscribe the pentagon inside a circle and push
the new sides out till they intersect the circle. Now do it again, making an
icosagon, with twenty sides.

Do it again, and again seven more times, and you’ll have a regular 1,280sided polygon, which is well-nigh indistinguishable from a circle in
imagination, but is as distinct in conception from a circle—and from a
chiliagon—as a square is distinct from a circle. If I ask you to imagine a
circle inside a chiliagon inside a circle inside a chiliagon inside a circle,
making a sort of bull’s-eye target, can you tell in your mental image which

=== p. 256 ===

are the circles and which are the chiliagons? No, they all look just like
circles, but you have no difficulty conceiving of the circumstance you’ve
been asked to think about.
   Descartes doesn’t tell you to perform such constructions; to him
conception, like imagination, is a kind of direct and episodic mental act,
glomming without bothering to picture, or something like that. You
somehow just grasp (mentally) the relevant concepts (SIDE, THOUSAND,
REGULAR, POLYGON), and shazam! You’ve got it. I have always been
suspicious of this Cartesian basic act of conceiving. If you can do it, good
for you, but I find that I can’t (any more than I can conceive a baby, in
another sense of the term). I am not confident that I have succeeded in
conceiving of something until I have manipulated the relevant ideas for
some time, testing out implications in my mind, doing exercises, in effect,
until I get fluent in handling the tools involved. (And when I do these
mental gymnastics, I make heavy use of my imagination, exploring various
diagrams and pictures in my head, for instance. In short, I exploit what
Descartes would disparage as merely my imagination to accomplish what
he would celebrate as my conception.) Can you conceive of string theory?
Do you find all that talk about umpteen dimensions filled with superstrings
and “branes” and the like easy to make sense of, easy to test for logical
consistency? It is unintelligible to me, but for that very reason I wouldn’t
be willing to declare it inconceivable or impossible (Ross, 2013). I am
unconvinced, but I am also not so confident in my own conceptual abilities
as to dismiss it as nonsense. I haven’t been able to conceive of the truth of
string theory yet. We should not put much weight on blithe verdicts of
conceivability or inconceivability in the absence of careful demonstrations.
Bateson said that a material gene was “inconceivable,” but if he were alive
today, he could readily learn to conceive of one. After all, children in grade
school learn about the double helix with all its rungs, a phenomenon that
proves readily conceivable to them once they get the hang of it. But no
amount of new information and techniques of imagination will help us
conceive of a round square (a regular four-sided polygon whose boundaries
are everywhere equidistant from its center), or a largest prime number.
   I am pretty sure that a philosophers’ zombie is conceptually incoherent,
impossible, a bankrupt idea. But don’t take my word for it. What could you
do to convince yourself that you can conceive of a philosophers’ zombie?
Suppose you try to imagine that your friend Zeke “turns out to be” a

=== p. 257 ===

zombie. What would convince you or even tempt you to conclude that this
is so?1 What difference would make all the difference? Remember, nothing
Zeke could do should convince you that Zeke is, or isn’t, a zombie. I find
that many people don’t do this exercise correctly; that is, they
inconveniently forget or set aside part of the definition of a philosophers’
zombie when they attempt their feat of conception. It may help you see if
you are making this mistake if we distinguish a special subspecies of
zombies that I call zimboes (Dennett, 1991a). All zombies have
nonconscious (of course) control systems that extract information from the
world (via their zombie eyeballs and ears) and exploit that information to
avoid walking into walls and to turn when you call, and so on. They are all
intentional systems, in other words. But a zimbo is special, a zombie that is
also blessed with equipment that permits it to monitor its own activities,
both internal and external, so it has internal (nonconscious) higher-order
informational states that are about its other internal states. Further self-monitoring allows a zimbo to have and use information about those very
self-monitoring states, and so on, indefinitely. A zimbo, in other words, is
equipped with recursive self-representation—unconscious recursive self-representation, if that makes any sense. It is only in virtue of this special
talent that a zimbo can participate in the following sort of conversation:
         YOU: Zeke, do you like me?
         ZEKE: Of course I do. You’re my best friend!
         YOU: Did you mind my asking?
         ZEKE: Well, yes, it was almost insulting. It bothered me that you
         asked.
         YOU: How do you know?
         ZEKE: Hmm. I just recall feeling a bit annoyed or threatened or
         maybe just surprised to hear such a question from you. Why did
         you ask?
         YOU: Let me ask the questions, please.
         ZEKE: If you insist. This whole conversation is actually not sitting
         well with me.
Remember: since a philosophical zombie is declared to be behaviorally
indistinguishable from a conscious person, behaviors like carrying out this
conversation are within its repertoire, and in order to control such
behaviors the zombie is going to need recursive self-representation. It can
“think” (in its unconscious zombie way) about how it feels about how it felt

=== p. 258 ===

about what it was thinking of when it wondered whether . . . , and so forth.
It is easy enough to imagine your dreadful suspicions being aroused if Zeke
just draws a blank, becoming weirdly unresponsive when you query him
this way, but that would be discovering that if Zeke is a zombie, he isn’t a
zimbo. You should always make sure you’re thinking of a zimbo when you
ask if a philosophers’ zombie is a real possibility, for only a being with
recursive self-representation would be able to hold its own in everyday
interactions like this conversation, to say nothing of writing poetry, framing
novel scientific hypotheses, and acting in dramas, all of which are within
the competences of zimboes—by definition.
   Unless you go to the trouble of imagining, in detail, how
indistinguishable “normal” Zeke would be from zimbo Zeke, you haven’t
really tried to conceive of a philosophers’ zombie. You’re like Leibniz,
giving up without half trying. Now ask yourself a few more questions. Why
would you care whether Zeke is a zimbo? Or more personally, why would
you care whether you are, or became, a zimbo? In fact, you’d never know.
   Really? Does Zeke have beliefs? Or does he just have sorta beliefs, “you
know, the sort of informational states-minus-consciousness that guide
zimboes through their lives the way beliefs guide the rest of us”? Only
here, the sorta beliefs are exactly as potent, as competent, as “the real
thing,” so this is an improper use of the sorta operator. We can bring this
out by imagining that left-handers (like me, DCD) are zimboes; only right-handers are conscious!
          DCD: You say you’ve proved that we lefties are zombies? I never
          would have guessed! Poor us? In what regard?
          RIGHTIE: Well, by definition you’re not conscious—what could be
          worse than that?
          DCD: Worse for whom? If there’s nobody home, then there’s
          nobody in the dark, missing out on everything. But what are you
          doing, trying to have a conversation with me, a zimbo?
          RIGHTIE: Well, there seems to me to be somebody there.
          DCD: To me too! After all, as a zimbo, I have all manner of
          higher-order self-monitoring competences. I know when I’m
          frustrated, when I’m in pain, when I’m bored, when I’m amused,
          and so forth.
          RIGHTIE: No. You function as if you knew these things, but you
          don’t really know anything. You only sorta know these things.

=== p. 259 ===

         DCD: I think that’s a misuse of the sorta operator. What you’re
         calling my sorta knowledge is indistinguishable from your so-called real knowledge—except for your “definitional” point:
         zimbo knowledge isn’t real.
         RIGHTIE: But there is a difference, there must be a difference!
         DCD: That sounds like bare prejudice to me.
   If this isn’t enough rehearsal of what it would be like to befriend a
zimbo, try some more. Seriously, consider writing a novel about a zimbo
stuck in a world of conscious people, or a conscious person marooned on
the Island of the Zimboes. What details could you dream up that would
make this a credible tale? Or you could take an easier path: read a good
novel while holding onto the background hypothesis that it is a novel about
zimboes. What gives it away or disconfirms your hypothesis? Novelists
have a choice of standpoints or narrative modes, including the first-person
narrative used by Herman Melville in Moby-Dick and by J. D. Salinger in
The Catcher in the Rye:
         “Call me Ishmael.”
         “When I really worry about something, I don’t just fool around. I
         even have to go to the bathroom when I worry about something.
         Only, I don’t go. I’m too worried to go. I don’t want to interrupt
         my worrying to go.”
Other novelists opt for the third-person omniscient narrative. Curiously,
the first-person narrative mode might seem to lend itself more to sustaining
the zombie hypothesis. After all, the entire story merely depicts that
narrative behavior of Zimbo Ishmael or Zimbo Holden Caulfield. We see
only their outsides, and what they purport to be accounts drawing on their
inner lives! Compare those first-person narratives to these third-person
narratives in Jane Austen’s Persuasion and Fyodor Dostoevsky’s Crime and
Punishment, for example:
         She [Elizabeth] felt that Mrs Musgrove and all her party ought to
         be asked to dine with them, but she could not bear to have the
         difference of style, the reduction of servants, which a dinner must
         betray, witnessed by those who had been always so inferior to the
         Elliots of Kellynch. It was a struggle between propriety and

=== p. 260 ===

          vanity; but vanity got the better, and then Elizabeth was happy
          again.
          He [Raskolnikov] looked at Sonia and felt how great her love for
          him was, and, strange to say, he felt distressed and pained that he
          should be loved so much. Yes, it was a queer and dreadful
          sensation.
   Here, it seems, the authors let us “look right into the minds” of Elizabeth
and Raskolnikov, so how could they be zimboes? But remember: where
conscious people have a stream of consciousness, zimboes have a stream of
unconsciousness. After all, zimboes are not supposed to be miraculous;
their behaviors are controlled by a host of internal goings-on of tremendous
informational complexity, and modulated by functional emotion-analogues
that amount to happiness, distress, and pain. So both Elizabeth and
Raskolnikov could be zimboes, with Austen and Dostoevsky using the
terms we all know and love from folk psychology to render descriptions of
their inner goings-on, just as chess programmers talk about the iterated
“searches” and risky “judgments” of their computer programs. A zimbo can
be embarrassed by a loss of social status, or smothered by love.
   Never forget William Bateson’s failure of imagination. When I try my
hardest to avoid that trap, hunting for loopholes in my background
assumptions, keeping my eye peeled for ways in which I could be proved
wrong about zombies, I always come up with imagined discoveries that
show, at most, that the whole concept of consciousness is seriously
confused. For instance, I can imagine that there might be two (or seven, or
ninety-nine) different sorts of so-called consciousness, and lefties have
one, and righties have another, and lobsters have yet another. But the only
way I can imagine this (so far) is by imagining that they are
distinguishable by the following functional differences: lefties can’t do X,
and righties can’t do Y, and so on. But those distinguishable differences
just go to show that we’re not talking about philosophical zombies after all,
for (by definition) there are no distinguishable-from-the-outside
differences between philosophical zombies and “genuinely conscious”
people. And nobody has yet been able to articulate a distinguishable-fromthe-inside mark of genuine consciousness that doesn’t somehow involve
the putatively conscious person being able to do something “mental” that
convinces us (and her) that she is conscious. But whatever this mental
difference is would presumably have its counterpart sham version in the

=== p. 261 ===

zombie’s “stream of unconsciousness.” If not, why not? So I am quite
confident that the whole idea of a philosophical zombie is a sort of
intellectual hallucination, an affliction one can outgrow. Try it. I’ll provide
some further assistance for this task of self-persuasion later in this section.

1 This is another one of those places where some philosophers would like to accuse me of
confusing a metaphysical question with an epistemological question: “Don’t ask how we would
know someone is a zombie! Ask what it is to be a zombie!” Metaphysics so isolated from
epistemology is, at best, an exercise in fantasy.

=== p. 262 ===

56. THE CURSE OF THE CAULIFLOWER

I see you tucking eagerly into a helping of steaming cauliflower, the merest
whiff of which makes me faintly nauseated, and I find myself wondering
how you could possibly relish that taste, and then it occurs to me that to
you, cauliflower probably tastes (must taste?) different. A plausible
hypothesis, it seems, especially since I know that the very same food often
tastes different to me at different times. For instance, my first sip of
breakfast orange juice tastes much sweeter than my second sip if I
interpose a bit of pancakes and maple syrup, but after a swallow or two of
coffee, the orange juice goes back to tasting (roughly? exactly?) the way it
did during the first sip. Surely (ding!) we want to say (or think about) such
things, and surely (ding!) we are not wildly wrong when we do, so . . .
surely (ding!) it is quite okay to talk of the way the juice tastes to Dennett
at time t, and ask whether it is just the same as or different from the way
the juice tastes to Dennett at time t’, or the way the juice tastes to Jones at
time t. Call these ways things can seem to us qualia.
   This “conclusion” seems innocent, but right here we have already made
the big mistake. The final step presumes that we can isolate the “qualia”
from everything else that is going on—at least in principle or for the sake
of argument. What counts as the way the juice tastes to x can be
distinguished, one supposes, from what is a mere accompaniment,
contributory cause, or by-product of this “central” way. One dimly
imagines taking such cases and stripping them down gradually to the
essentials, leaving their common residuum, the way things look, sound,
feel, taste, smell to various individuals at various times, independently of
how those individuals are stimulated or non-perceptually affected, and
independently of how they are subsequently disposed to behave or believe.
The mistake is not in supposing that we can in practice ever or always
perform this act of purification with certainty, but the more fundamental
mistake of supposing that there is such a residual property to take seriously,
however uncertain our actual attempts at isolation of instances might be.
   The examples that seduce us are abundant in every modality. I cannot
imagine, will never know, could never know, it seems, how Bach sounded to
Glenn Gould. (I can barely recover in my memory the way Bach sounded to

=== p. 263 ===

me when I was a child.) And I cannot know, it seems, what it is like to be a
bat (Nagel, 1974), or whether you see what I see, color-wise, when we look
up at a clear “blue” sky. These everyday cases convince us of the reality of
these special properties—those subjective tastes, looks, aromas, sounds—
that we then apparently isolate for definition by this act of philosophical
distillation. Thus are qualia born.
   “Qualia” is a “technical” term for something that could not be more
familiar to each of us: the ways things seem to us. Nothing, it seems, could
you know more intimately than your own qualia; let the entire universe be
some vast illusion, some mere figment of Descartes’s evil demon, and yet
what the figment is made of (for you) will be the qualia of your
hallucinatory experiences. Descartes claimed to doubt everything that
could be doubted, but he never doubted that his conscious experiences had
qualia, the properties by which he knew or apprehended them.
   This definition of qualia may seem clear enough—the ways things seem
to us—but although qualia thus introduced have been the subject of much
analysis and discussion by philosophers, there is still no consensus about
just what the term means or implies, technically speaking. Many cognitive
scientists have made the charitable assumption that philosophers must
know what they are talking about when they use this special term, and have
added the term to their working vocabulary, but this is a tactical mistake.
Controversy still rages on what qualia are and aren’t, quite independently
from any empirical issues. Some years ago, in an essay, I (1988a) proposed
that the root concept of qualia has four conditions. Qualia are

1. ineffable,
2. intrinsic,
3. private, and
4. directly apprehensible ways things seem to one.
That is to say, they are (1) somehow atomic to introspection, and hence
indescribable (“you had to be there”); (2) not relational or dispositional or
functional (the color red may be anxiety-provoking to some people, but that
subjective disposition is not a quale of red); (3) “You had to be there, but
you can’t be; they’re mine and mine alone!”; and (4) your qualia are known
to you more intimately than anything else.
   This is still regarded as a good starting place in most circles, but since
the point of that essay was to show that nothing could meet these four

=== p. 264 ===

conditions, there has been ample discussion of revised or improved
versions of the concept, with no emerging consensus. It is not unusual for a
much-used and generally highly regarded technical term to have multiple
incompatible definitions—think of “gene” or “species” in biology and
“cause” almost everywhere in science—but the disarray surrounding
“qualia” strikes me as worse, a Trojan horse to anyone in other disciplines
who thinks of the concept as a gift from philosophy that might come in
handy in their own research.
   I trotted out thirteen other intuition pumps (in addition to the
cauliflower) in that essay, and I will not repeat any of them here, since over
the years I have devised other, probably more powerful tools to wield in my
continuing battle against the complacency expressed in a famous response
to the challenge to say what, exactly, qualia are. Ned Block (1978, p. 281)
dismissed this obstreperous query “only half in jest” by invoking Louis
Armstrong’s legendary reply when he was asked what jazz was: “If you got
to ask, you ain’t never gonna get to know.” This amusing tactic perfectly
expresses the presumption that is my target. If I succeed in my task, this
response of Block’s, which still passes muster in most circles today, will
look as quaint and insupportable as a jocular expression of disbelief by a
vitalist who, when confronted with a person—“a living thing, mind you!”—
claimed to doubt the very existence of élan vital.

=== p. 265 ===

57. VIM: HOW MUCH IS THAT IN “REAL MONEY”?

It is a common opinion that although you could construct a robotic model
of color vision, say, that exhibited all the familiar phenomena we humans
experience, such as complementary afterimages and color contrast
illusions, and although the robot would have similar internal processes that
accounted for its afterimages and so forth, since “it’s just a robot” it
couldn’t have red and blue qualia. The functional states that signaled or
represented colored things in front of the robot’s television camera eyes
would not have that extra something that we have. Thomas Nagel’s famous
essay “What Is It Like to Be a Bat?” (1974) provides us with a standard
way of alluding to the conscious states, if any, of an entity. It wouldn’t be
like anything to be a robot having an afterimage. Why do so many people
think this is obvious? It might be because they are imagining a relatively
simple robot and failing to note that you can’t draw conclusions about all
robots from facts about all simple robots. Of course if you define qualia as
intrinsic properties of experiences considered in isolation from all their
causes and effects, and logically independent of all dispositional properties,
then qualia are logically guaranteed to elude all functional analysis. No
amount of clever engineering could endow a robot with qualia—but this is
an empty victory, since there is no reason to believe such intrinsic
properties exist.
   To see this, compare the qualia of experience to the value of money.
Some naïve Americans seem to think that dollars, unlike euros and yen,
have intrinsic value. The tourist in the cartoon asks, “How much is that in
real money?” meaning how much is that in dollars. Let’s push this idea a
little farther: These naïve Americans are willing to exchange dollars for
euros; they are happy to “reduce” the value of other currencies to their
exchange rate with dollars (or goods and services), but when they do this,
they have a sense that dollars are different. Every dollar, they declare, has
something logically independent of the functional exchange powers it
shares with all other currencies in circulation. A dollar has a certain je ne
sais quoi. When you contemplate it, you can detect that it has an aura of
value—less than in the olden days, perhaps, but still discernible: let’s call it
the dollar’s vim (from the Latin, vis, meaning power). Officially, then, vim
is the non-relational, non-dispositional, intrinsic economic value of a

=== p. 266 ===

dollar. Pounds sterling and euros and the like have no intrinsic value—they
are just symbolic stand-ins; they are redeemable for dollars, and hence
have derived economic value, but they don’t have vim! How sad for those
Europeans! Their currencies lack intrinsic economic value! How do they
bear it? How do they motivate themselves to earn their pay, these poor
vimbies! Those of us fortunate enough to get paid in dollars acquire items
with a good helping of vim attached. No wonder the U.S. dollar has been
adopted as the currency of choice in so many nations! Even foreigners can
sense the vim of a dollar.
    So say our imaginary American tourists. So defined, the vim of each
dollar is guaranteed to elude the theories of economists forever, since no
economic theory could ever account for intrinsic economic value. So much
the worse for economics? The existence of vim would render economics a
seriously incomplete science, but fortunately, we have no good reason to
believe that there is such a thing as intrinsic economic value. Vim is quite
obviously a figment of the imagination, an artifact of the heartfelt hunches
of those naïve Americans, and we can explain the artifact without honoring
it.
    Some participants in the consciousness debates are rather like the
imaginary tourists. They simply insist, flat out, that their intuitions about
intrinsic phenomenal properties are a nonnegotiable starting point for any
science of consciousness. Such a conviction should be considered an
interesting symptom deserving a diagnosis, a datum that any science of
consciousness must account for, in the same spirit that economists and
psychologists might set out to explain why so many people succumb to the
potent illusion that money has intrinsic value. (When Europe switched to
the euro, people who were used to conceiving of prices in terms of francs
and marks and lire and the like went through an awkward period when they
could no longer rely on “translations” into their home-grown versions of
“real money.” See Dehaene and Marques, 2002, for a pioneering
exploration of this phenomenon.)
    There are many properties of conscious states that can and should be
subjected to further scientific investigation right now, and once we get
accounts of them in place, we may well find that they satisfy us as an
explanation of what consciousness is. After all, this is what happened in the
case of the erstwhile “mystery” of what life is. Vitalism—the insistence
that there is some big, mysterious extra ingredient in all living things,

=== p. 267 ===

dubbed élan vital—turns out to have been a failure of imagination. Vitalism
today is all but extinct, though there are still a few cranks around who
haven’t given up. Inspired by that happy success story, we can proceed with
our scientific exploration of consciousness. If the day arrives when all the
demonstrable features of consciousness are explained, all the
acknowledged intellectual debts are paid, and we plainly see that something
big is missing (it should stick out like a sore thumb at some point, if it is
really important), those with the unshakable hunch will get to say they told
us so. In the meantime, they can worry about how to fend off the diagnosis
that they, like the vitalists before them, have been misled by an illusion.
Here is the challenge, then, to those who believe in qualia as intrinsic
properties of experiences: How do they distinguish their conviction from
the mistake of the naïve Americans? (Or are the Americans right? Dollars
do have vim, as anybody can just intuit!)

=== p. 268 ===

58. THE SAD CASE OF MR. CLAPGRAS

So what are qualia, then, if not intrinsic properties of conscious
experiences? One evening, over a fine bottle of Chambertin, the
philosopher Wilfrid Sellars said to me, “Dan, qualia are what make life
worth living!” That’s an attractive idea. Let’s consider what it would imply
about qualia. To see what is at issue, I will present an intuition pump
against a background of recent work in cognitive neuroscience on several
bizarre and counterintuitive pathologies: prosopagnosia and Capgras
delusion.
   Prosopagnosics have normal vision in most regards, but they cannot
recognize faces. They can tell a male from a female, old from young,
African from Asian, but faced with several close friends of the same gender
and age, they are unable to tell which is which until they hear a voice or
detect some other identifying peculiarity. Given a row of photographs of
people, including famous politicians and movie stars, family members, and
anonymous strangers, a prosopagnosic asked to identify any who are known
to him will generally perform at chance. Those of us who are not
prosopagnosics may find it difficult to imagine what it’s like to look right
at one’s mother, say, and be unable to recognize her. Some may find it hard
to believe that prosopagnosia exists. When I tell people about these
phenomena, I often discover skeptics who are quite confident that I am
making these facts up. But we must learn to treat such difficulties as
measures of our frail powers of imagination, not insights into impossibility.
Prosopagnosia (from the Greek prosopon, which means “face,” and
agnosia, “not knowing”) is a well-studied, uncontroversial pathology
afflicting thousands of people.
   One of the most interesting facts about (many) prosopagnosics is that in
spite of their inability to identify or recognize faces as a conscious task,
they can respond differently to familiar and unfamiliar faces, and even
respond in ways indicating that unbeknownst to themselves, or covertly,
they were able to identify the faces they were unable to identify when
asked. For instance, such covert recognition is demonstrated when
prosopagnosics are shown pictures and given five candidate names from
which to choose. They choose at chance, but their galvanic skin response—
a measure of emotional arousal—shows a distinct rise when they hear the

=== p. 269 ===

correct name associated with the picture. Or consider this simple test:
Which of the following are names of politicians: Marilyn Monroe, Al Gore,
Margaret Thatcher, Mike Tyson? You should be able to execute this task
swiftly, but if each name were shown with the wrong picture of the person,
your response would be markedly delayed. This could be explained only if
at some level, you were actually identifying the faces, even though it was
strictly irrelevant to the task. It seems, then, that there are (at least) two
largely independent visual face-recognition systems in the brain: the
impaired conscious system, which cannot help the subjects in the task
presented by the experiment, and the unimpaired unconscious system,
which responds with agitation to the mismatched names and faces. Further
tests show that the impaired system is “higher,” in the visual cortex, while
the unimpaired system has connections to the “lower,” limbic system. This
oversimplifies a richer story about the varieties of prosopagnosia and what
is now known about the brain areas involved, but it will do for our
purposes, when we turn to the even stranger pathology known as Capgras
delusion (first described by the French psychiatrist Jean Marie Joseph
Capgras in 1923).
   People who suffer from Capgras delusion suddenly come to believe that
a loved one—a spouse or lover or parent, in most cases—has been covertly
replaced with a replica impostor. Capgras sufferers are not insane; they are
otherwise quite normal people who, as a result of brain injury, suddenly
acquire this particular belief, which they maintain with such confidence, in
spite of its extravagance or its utter unlikeliness, that in some cases they
kill or seriously harm the “impostor”—actually their loved one. At first
glance it must seem simply impossible for any brain damage to have
precisely this weird effect. (Should we also expect there to be people who
get hit on the head and thereafter believe that the moon is made of green
cheese?) But cognitive neuroscientist Andrew Young saw a pattern, and
proposed that the Capgras delusion was simply the “opposite” of the
pathology that produces prosopagnosia. In Capgras, the conscious, cortical
face-recognition system is spared—that’s how the deluded sufferer
recognizes the person standing in front of him as the spitting image of his
loved one—but the unconscious, limbic system is disabled, draining the
recognition of all the emotional resonance it ought to have. The absence of
that subtle contribution to identification is so upsetting (“Something’s
missing!”) that it amounts to a pocket veto on the positive vote of the

=== p. 270 ===

surviving system’s identification of the familiar person: the emergent result
is the sufferer’s heartfelt conviction that he or she is looking at an impostor.
Instead of blaming the mismatch on their own faulty perceptual system,
Capgras sufferers blame the world, in a way that is so metaphysically
extravagant, so improbable, that there can be little doubt of the power (the
political power, in effect) that the impaired unconscious face-recognition
system normally has in us all. When this particular system’s epistemic
hunger goes unsatisfied, it throws such a fit that it overthrows the
contributions of the other systems.
   Haydn Ellis and Young first proposed this hypothesis in 1990, and since
then Young and neuroscientist Chris Frith and others have confirmed and
elaborated it. There are, of course, complications that I will not dwell on,
since I want to use this particular bit of imagination-stretching cognitive
neuroscience to open our minds to yet another possibility, not yet found but
imaginable. This is the imaginary case of poor Mr. Clapgras, a name I have
made up to remind us of its inspiration: the real syndrome of Capgras
delusion. (This scenario joins a large throng of philosophers’ intuition
pumps exploring imaginable disruptions in a person’s consciousness that
might bear on the nature of qualia.)
   Mr. Clapgras earns a modest living as an experimental subject in
psychological and psychophysical experiments, so he is far from naïve
about his own subjective states. One day he wakes up and cries out in
despair as soon as he opens his eyes: “Aargh! There’s something wrong!
The whole world is just . . . weird, just . . . awful, somehow wrong! I don’t
know if I want to go on living in this world!” Clapgras closes his eyes and
rubs them; he cautiously opens them again, only to be confronted yet again
by a strangely disgusting world, familiar but also different in some way
that defies description. That’s what he says. “What do you see when you
look up?” he is asked. “Blue sky, with a few fleecy white clouds, some
yellowish-green buds on the springtime trees, a bright red cardinal perched
on a twig,” he replies. Apparently his color vision is normal, but just to
check, he is given the standard Ishihara test, which shows he is not colorblind, and he correctly identifies a few-dozen Munsell color chips. Almost
everybody is satisfied that whatever poor Mr. Clapgras’s ailment is, it
doesn’t involve his color vision, but one researcher, Dr. Chromaphil, holds
out for a few more tests.

=== p. 271 ===

   Chromaphil has been conducting research on color preferences,
emotional responses to color, and the effects of different colors on
attention, concentration, blood pressure, pulse rate, metabolic activity, and
a host of other subtle visceral responses. Over the past six months he has
accumulated a huge database of Mr. Clapgras’s responses, both
idiosyncratic and common, on all these tests, and he wants to see if there
have been any changes. He retests Clapgras and notices a stunning pattern:
all the emotional and visceral responses Clapgras used to exhibit to blue he
now exhibits to yellow, and vice versa. His preference for red over green
has been reversed, as have all his other color preferences. Food disgusts
him—unless he eats in the dark. Color combinations he used to rate as
pleasing he now rates as jarring, while finding the combinations of their
“opposites” pleasing, and so forth. The shade of shocking pink that used to
set his pulse racing he still identifies as shocking pink (though he marvels
that anybody could call that shade of pink shocking), but it is now calming
to him, while its complement, a shade of lime green that used to be
calming, now excites him. When he looks at paintings, his trajectory of
saccades—the swift jumps our eyes make as they scan anything—is now
profoundly unlike his earlier trajectories, which were apparently governed
by subtle attention-grabbing, gaze-deflecting effects of the colors on the
canvas. His ability to concentrate on mental arithmetic problems,
heretofore seriously depressed by putting him in a bright-blue room, is now
depressed by putting him in a bright-yellow room.
   In short, although Clapgras does not complain about any problems of
color vision, and indeed passes all standard color-naming and color-discriminating tests with, well, flying colors, he has undergone a profound
inversion of all his emotional and attentional reactions to colors. What has
happened to Clapgras, Dr. Chromaphil tells his amazed and skeptical
colleagues, is simple: he’s undergone a total color qualia inversion, while
leaving intact his merely high-level cognitive color talents—his ability to
discriminate and name colors, for instance, the talents a color-sensitive
robot could have.
   Now what should we say? Have Clapgras’s qualia been inverted? Since
the case is imaginary, it seems that we can answer it however we like, but
philosophers have been taking other imaginary cases seriously for years,
thinking that profound theoretical issues hinge on how they are decided, so
we mustn’t just dismiss the case. First, is this a possible case? It may

=== p. 272 ===

depend on what kind of possibility we are talking about. Is it logically
possible? Is it physiologically possible? These are profoundly different
questions. Philosophers have tended to ignore the latter as quite irrelevant
to philosophical concerns, but in this case they may relent. I can see no way
of arguing that the case is logically impossible. Clapgras, as described, has
a strange combination of spared abilities and shocking new inabilities;
dispositions that are normally tightly linked are here dissociated in
unprecedented ways, but is his condition any more radical in this regard
than either prosopagnosia or Capgras delusion? I am not sure Clapgras’s
condition is even physiologically impossible; there are well-studied cases
of subjects who can discriminate colors just fine but not name them (color
anomia), and of subjects who become color-blind but don’t notice their new
deficit, blithely confabulating and naming colors at chance without any
recognition that they are guessing. Clapgras, like a Capgras sufferer, has no
problems with recognition or naming; it is the subtle ineffable flavoring
that has gone all askew in him—all the personal dispositions that make
paintings worth looking at, rooms worth painting, color combinations
worth choosing. The effects of colors that contribute to making life worth
living are what changed in Clapgras—in other words (if Sellars was right),
his color qualia.
   Suppose we put the issue to Clapgras and ask him if his color qualia have
been inverted. He has three possible answers: Yes, No, and I don’t know.
Which should he answer? If we compare my story of Clapgras with the
many tales of inverted qualia that have been soberly promulgated and
discussed at great length by philosophers, the most disturbing innovation is
the prospect that Clapgras might have his qualia inverted and be none the
wiser. Remember that Dr. Chromaphil had to propose this hypothesis to his
skeptical colleagues, and Clapgras may well share their skepticism. After
all, he not only hasn’t complained of any problem with his color qualia (as
in the standard stories), but also has satisfied himself that his color vision
is just fine in the same way he satisfied the researchers: by easily passing
the standard color vision tests. This feature of the story ought to cause
some discomfort, for it is commonly assumed in the philosophical
literature that such behavioral self-testing is irrelevant: surely (ding!)
those tests have no bearing at all on qualia. Those tests are standardly
characterized as having no power at all to illuminate or constrain qualia
quandaries. But, as my variation shows, philosophers’ imaginations have

=== p. 273 ===

overlooked the prospect of somebody being at least tempted to rely on
these tests to secure his own confidence that his qualia have not changed.
   Can your qualia stay constant while you undergo a change in “affect”?
Philosophers are divided over how to answer such definitional questions
about qualia. Consider the effect of monosodium glutamate (MSG), the
flavor enhancer. There is no doubt that it makes food seem tastier, more
strongly flavored, but does it change the qualia of food, or does it merely
heighten the sensitivity of people to the qualia they were already enjoying?
This is an appeal for a clarification of the concept of qualia, not an
empirical question about the site of action of MSG, or the variation in
human responses to MSG as shown by subjects’ reports, since until we
settle the conceptual question one way or another, any discoveries about the
underlying neural processes or heterophenomenology of the subject would
be systematically ambiguous. What I want to know is simply how
philosophers mean to use the word “qualia”—do they identify all changes
in subjective response as changes in qualia, or is there some privileged
subset of responses that in effect anchor the qualia? Is the idea of changing
one’s aesthetic opinion about—or response to—a particular quale nonsense
or not? Until one makes decisions about such questions of definition, the
term is not just vague or fuzzy; it is hopelessly ambiguous, equivocating
between two (or more) fundamentally different ideas.
   Have Clapgras’s color qualia been inverted? Some philosophers say that
I haven’t given enough detail in describing his condition. I have described
his behavioral competences—he recognizes, and discriminates, and names
colors correctly, while responding “wrong” in many other regards—while
avoiding describing his subjective state. I haven’t said whether, when he
looks at a ripe lemon, he experiences intrinsic subjective yellow or, say,
intrinsic subjective blue. But that is the point: I am challenging the
presumption that these terms name any real properties of his experience at
all. Suppose I add that when asked, Clapgras says, “Since I still see ripe
lemons as yellow, of course my experience includes the property of
intrinsic subjective yellow.” Does that settle anything? Do we have any
confidence that he knows what he means when he says these words? Should
we believe him, or might he be in the grip of a philosophical theory that
does not deserve his allegiance?
   Here is the main weakness in the philosophical methods standardly used
in these cases: philosophers tend to assume that all the competences and

=== p. 274 ===

dispositions that normal people exhibit regarding, say, colors, form a
monolithic block, invulnerable to decomposition or dissociation into
independent sub-competences and sub-dispositions. This handily excuses
them from addressing the question of whether qualia are to be anchored to
some subset or specific disposition. For instance, philosophers George
Graham and Terry Horgan (2000, p. 73) speak of “direct acquaintance with
phenomenal character itself, acquaintance that provides the experiential
basis for [a person’s] recognitional/discriminatory capacities.” How do they
know that this “direct acquaintance” is the “basis” for recognition or
discrimination? Prosopagnosics presumably have direct acquaintance with
the faces they see, or at least with the “visual qualia” of those familiar
faces, but prosopagnosics cannot recognize them as the qualia that are
experienced when they are looking at the faces of their friends and family.
If, to harken back to Wilfrid Sellars once again, qualia are what make life
worth living, then qualia may not be the “experiential basis” for our ability
to recognize colors from day to day, to discriminate colors, to name them.

=== p. 275 ===

59. THE TUNED DECK

In a famous paper, the philosopher David Chalmers (1995) distinguishes
the “easy” problems about consciousness from what he calls the (capital
“H”) Hard Problem of consciousness. What Chalmers would consider
“easy” is still difficult enough. Consider, for example, these really
challenging questions about consciousness:

1. How does consciousness enable us to talk about what we see, the sounds
  we hear, the aromas we smell, and so on? (Oversimplifying, how does the
  information from the perceiving parts of the brain get used by the
  language parts of the brain to form the reports and answers we can give?)
2. When we are doing a routine activity (one we can “almost do in our
  sleep”), why does our consciousness kick in whenever we run into a
  problem, and how does consciousness help us with the problem
  encountered?
3. How many independently moving things can we consciously track
  simultaneously, and how do we do it? (The answer is at least four; you
  can see for yourself by experiencing an amazing demonstration of this
  phenomenon, known as FINST indexing, at http://ruccs
  .rutgers.edu/finstlab/MOT-movies/MOT-Occ-baseline .mov.)
4. When you have something “on the tip of your tongue”—when you know
  you know it and can almost retrieve the answer—what is going on?
5. Why do you have to be conscious of a joke to find it funny? (See Hurley,
  Dennett, and Adams, 2011, for the book-length answer to this one.)
  These problems are relatively easy, according to Chalmers, because they
involve the cognitive functions of consciousness, the things we can do,
using the information-processing and attention-directing processes in the
brain, the tracking and reminding and recalling activities that we engage in
during our waking lives. However hard it may be to think up promising
solutions to them, the solutions will be testable and refinable by
experiments, and in fact we’re making great progress on these “easy”
problems. We can build relatively simple computer models, for instance,
that replicate these functions quite persuasively, so we can be quite sure the
brain accomplishes them without magic or anything unparalleled in the rest

=== p. 276 ===

of nature. A robot that exhibited all these phenomena could be constructed,
if not today then in the foreseeable future.
   The Hard Problem, for Chalmers, is the problem of “experience,” what it
is like to be conscious, the inexpressible, unanalyzable thusness of being
conscious. A robot could behave just as if it were conscious, answering all
our questions, tracking all the moving spots, succumbing to and recovering
from the tip-of-the-tongue phenomenon, laughing at the right times, and
being (unconsciously) puzzled or dumfounded at the right times, but in fact
there would be nobody home in there. The robot would be a zombie,
without the faintest shadow of the inner life you and I, as normal conscious
people, enjoy.
   According to Chalmers, you, gentle reader, and I know we are conscious
whenever we are up and about. A philosophers’ zombie doesn’t know any
such thing—it is never awake and has no inner life—it just seems from the
outside to be conscious. And of course it insists, convincingly, that it is just
as conscious as you and I are, and if given a lie-detector test when it says
this, it passes the test for sincerity—but, being a zombie, it is mistaken!
(Zombies are also indistinguishable from normal conscious people when
neuroscientists probe their inner brain states using fMRI machines, and the
like.) This makes it clear that telling a conscious person from a zombie is
certainly a hard problem—if it is any problem at all. And if that is a
problem, explaining how this difference can exist is an even harder
problem; it is the Hard Problem. Some of us, myself included, think the
Hard Problem is a figment of Chalmers’s imagination, but others—
surprisingly many—have the conviction that there is or would be a real
difference between a conscious person and a perfect zombie and that this is
important.
   Let me review this curious situation: some of us doubt the very existence
of the Hard Problem, but others think we must be crazy to doubt this:
nothing, they say, could be more obvious, more immediately intuited by
any conscious being, than his or her own special consciousness, and it is
this wonderful property we enjoy that defies scientific understanding (so
far) and thus deserves to be called the Hard Problem. There is no way to
nudge these two alternative positions closer to each other. One side or the
other is flat wrong. I have tried for years to show that however tempting the
intuition may be, it must be abandoned. I am quite sure that the tempting
idea that there is a Hard Problem is simply a mistake, but I cannot prove

=== p. 277 ===

this. Or, better, even if I could prove this, my proof would often fall on deaf
ears, since I am assured by some philosophers that their intuition here is
invulnerable bedrock, an insight so obvious and undeniable that no
argument could make it tremble, let alone shatter it. So I won’t make the
tactical error of trying to dislodge with rational argument a conviction that
is beyond reason.
   This attitude reminds me of the heartfelt convictions often expressed by
those who have just seen a spectacular display of stage magic. Every
magician knows that people have a tendency to inflate their recollections of
any good magic trick they have seen. The shock and bafflement of the
moment amplifies their memories, and they earnestly and sincerely insist
that they have just seen something that goes beyond what the magician
tried to fool them into seeing. Some people want very much to believe in
magic. Recall Lee Siegel’s comment about “real magic,” discussed in
chapter 22, on wonder tissue: “Real magic . . . refers to the magic that is
not real, while the magic that is real, that can actually be done, is not real
magic.” (See p. 98)
   To many people consciousness is “real magic.” If you’re not talking
about something that is supercalifragilisticexpialidocious, then you’re not
talking about consciousness, the Mystery Beyond All Understanding. The
science journalist Robert Wright (2000) expresses the attitude succinctly:
          Of course the problem here is with the claim that consciousness
          is “identical” to physical brain states. The more Dennett et al. try
          to explain to me what they mean by this, the more convinced I
          become that what they really mean is that consciousness doesn’t
          exist. [p. 398]
   Any bag of tricks in the brain just couldn’t be consciousness, not real
consciousness. But even those who don’t make this preemptive mistake
often have a weakness for exaggerating the phenomena of consciousness.
(That’s why so much of my book Consciousness Explained, 1991a, had to
be devoted to deflation, whittling consciousness—real consciousness—
down to size, showing people that the phenomena were not as spectacular
as most of them think. This exercise in deflation then inspired many
readers to joke that my book should have been entitled Consciousness
Explained Away or—as Wright suggests—Consciousness Denied.) For
those who doubt that they could be flummoxed into an inflated view of
consciousness, I want to strike a glancing blow, hoping to banish their

=== p. 278 ===

complacency by drawing attention to a delicious and disturbing parallel
from the world of card magic: The Tuned Deck.
         For many years, Mr. Ralph Hull, the famous card wizard from
         Crooksville, Ohio, has completely bewildered not only the
         general public, but also amateur conjurors, card connoisseurs and
         professional magicians with the series of card tricks which he is
         pleased to call “The Tuned Deck” . . .
                              —John Northern Hilliard, Card Magic (1938)
  Ralph Hull’s trick looks and sounds roughly like this:
         Boys, I have a new trick to show you. It’s called “The Tuned
         Deck.” This deck of cards is magically tuned [Hull holds the deck
         to his ear and riffles the cards, listening carefully to the buzz of
         the cards]. By their finely tuned vibrations, I can hear and feel the
         location of any card. Pick a card, any card. . . . [The deck is then
         fanned or otherwise offered for the audience, and a card is taken
         by a spectator, noted, and returned to the deck by one route or
         another.] Now I listen to the Tuned Deck, and what does it tell
         me? I hear the telltale vibrations, . . . [buzz, buzz, the cards are
         riffled by Hull’s ear and various manipulations and rituals are
         enacted, after which, with a flourish, the spectator’s card is
         presented].
   Hull would perform the trick over and over for the benefit of his select
audience of fellow magicians, challenging them to figure it out. Nobody
ever did. (Remember that a cardinal rule of card magic is never to repeat a
trick for the audience; this great trick audaciously flouted that rule.)
Magicians offered to buy the trick from him, but he would not sell it. Late
in his life he gave his account to his friend, Hilliard, who published the
account in his privately printed book. Here is what Hull had to say about
his trick:
         For years I have performed this effect and have shown it to
         magicians and amateurs by the hundred and, to the very best of
         my knowledge, not one of them ever figured out the secret. . . .
         the boys have all looked for something too hard [my italics].
  Like much great magic, the trick is over before you even realize it has
begun. The trick, in its entirety, is in the name, “The Tuned Deck,” and

=== p. 279 ===

more specifically, in one word—“The”! As soon as Hull had announced his
new trick and given its name to his eager audience, the trick was over.
Having set up his audience in this simple way, and having passed the time
with some obviously phony and misdirecting chatter about vibrations and
buzz-buzz-buzz, Hull would do a relatively simple and familiar card
presentation trick of type A (at this point I will draw the traditional curtain
of secrecy; the further mechanical details of legerdemain, as you will see,
do not matter). His audience, savvy magicians, would see that he might
possibly be performing a type A trick, a hypothesis they could test by being
stubborn and uncooperative spectators in a way that would thwart any
attempt at a type A trick. When they then adopted the appropriate
recalcitrance to test the hypothesis, Hull would “repeat” the trick, this time
executing a type B card presentation trick. The spectators would then
huddle and compare notes: Might he be doing a type B trick? They test that
hypothesis by adopting the recalcitrance appropriate to preventing a type B
trick, and still he does “the” trick—using method C. When they test the
hypothesis that he’s pulling a type C trick on them, he switches to method
D—or perhaps he goes back to method A or B, since his audience has
“refuted” the hypothesis that he’s using method A or B. And so it would go,
for dozens of repetitions, with Hull staying one step ahead of his
hypothesis-testers, exploiting his realization that he could always do some
trick or other from the pool of tricks they all knew, and concealing the fact
that he was doing a grab bag of different tricks by the simple expedient of
the definite article: The Tuned Deck. As Hull explained it to Hilliard,
          Each time it is performed, the routine is such that one or more
          ideas in the back of the spectator’s head is exploded, and sooner
          or later he will invariably give up any further attempt to solve the
          mystery.
  Hull’s trick was introducing a single common word: “the”—for heaven’s
sake! This modest monosyllable seduced his audience of experts,
paralyzing their minds, preventing them from jootsing. They found
themselves stuck in a system in which they were sure that they had to find a
big, new trick, so they couldn’t see that their problem(s) had not one
solution but many; they failed to jump out of the system.
  I am suggesting, then, that David Chalmers has—unintentionally—
perpetrated the same feat of conceptual sleight of hand in declaring to the
world that he has discovered “The Hard Problem.” Is there really a Hard

=== p. 280 ===

Problem? Or is what appears to be the Hard Problem simply the large bag
of tricks that constitute what Chalmers calls the Easy Problems of
Consciousness? These all have mundane explanations, requiring no
revolutions in physics, no emergent novelties. They succumb, with much
effort, to the standard methods of cognitive science.
   I cannot prove that there is no Hard Problem, and Chalmers cannot prove
that there is one. He has one potent intuition going for him, and if it
generated some striking new predictions, or promised to explain something
otherwise baffling, we might join him in trying to construct a new theory of
consciousness around it, but it stands alone, hard to deny but otherwise
theoretically inert.
   The inventory of known effects of consciousness is large and growing,
and they range from the mundane to the exotic. It’s hard to keep track of
them all, so we must be alert to the possibility that we are being victimized
by an error of arithmetic, in effect, when we take ourselves to have added
up all the Easy Problems and discovered a residue unaccounted for. That
residue may already have been accommodated, without our realizing it, in
the set of mundane phenomena for which we already have explanations—or
at least un-mysterious paths of explanation still to be explored. How could
we commit this “error in arithmetic” and then overlook it? By double
counting the phenomena or by forgetting that we had already explained
some phenomenon, and hence should have erased it from our list of “Stillto-Be-Explained Phenomena.” Is it plausible that we are making such a
mistake? Consider this: when we looked at poor Mr. Clapgras, we saw that
something was seriously amiss with him, but there seemed to be two
importantly different ways of putting his plight:
         A. His aesthetic and emotional reactions to his color qualia had
         all been inverted (while his qualia remained constant).
         B. His color qualia had been inverted, even though his
         competence to distinguish, identify, and name colors had been
         preserved.
   Consider how one might argue (rather like the baffled magicians trying
to figure out Hull’s trick): “A cannot be right, because the only reason we
have for saying his color qualia have remained constant is that his naming
and discriminating behavior has stayed constant, but that proves nothing
about his qualia; those behaviors are (merely) cognitive, functional facts,

=== p. 281 ===

and qualia are, of course, independent of those. And B cannot be right,
because it is only his reactions that have changed; Clapgras doesn’t
complain that colors look different to him now, but just that those very
same subjective colors don’t appeal to him now the way they used to. So
maybe his color qualia changed and maybe they didn’t, and—you’ll note—
there is no empirical way of telling which hypothesis is true! This is truly a
Hard Problem!”
   This argument overlooks the possibility that the qualia discussed in A
and B aren’t doing any work. In both A and B, we see that the
discrimination machinery is working just as before, while Clapgras’s
reactions to the deliverances of that machinery are inverted. The qualia are
interposed as a sort of hard-to-pin-down intermediary that is imagined to
provide the basis or raw material or ground of the emotional reactions, and
there seem then to be two places where the inversion could happen: before
the qualia are “presented” to the appreciation machinery, or after
“presentation,” in the way the appreciation machinery responds to those
presented qualia. This is one presentation process too many. We know, for
instance, that negative (alarming, fear-inducing) reactions can be triggered
quite early in the perceptual process, and they then “color” all subsequent
processing of that perceptual input, in which case we could say that the
emotional reactions cause the qualia to have the subjective character they
had for Clapgras, rather than (vice versa) that the “intrinsic” nature of the
qualia cause or ground the emotional reactions. But if we’ve already
arrived at the emotional (or aesthetic or affective) reactions to the
perceptual input, we have no more “work” for the qualia to do, and, of
course, a zimbo would be just as bummed out by inverted reactions-toperceptions as a conscious person is.
   What does the story about the Tuned Deck add to all the other intuition
pumps about qualia? Just a real-life example of how very clever,
knowledgeable experts can be induced to create a phantom problem simply
by the way an issue is presented to them. It has happened. It can happen
again. And this yields a novel perspective on the impasse, creating a new
burden of proof: How do you know that you have not fallen for something
like the Tuned Deck? I’m not suggesting that this is conclusive, but just
that it ought to give those who credit the Zombic Hunch some second
thoughts about how “obvious” it is.

=== p. 282 ===

60. THE CHINESE ROOM

In the late 1970s there was a wave of ballyhoo about AI—artificial
intelligence—that oversold both the existing and the prophesied progress in
the field. Thinking machines were just around the corner! Berkeley
philosopher John Searle was sure he could see through this, and concocted
a thought experiment to prove it. In 1980, he published “Minds, Brains and
Programs,” his famous Chinese Room thought experiment purporting to
show that “Strong AI” was impossible. He defined Strong AI as the claim
that “the appropriately programmed computer literally has cognitive states
and that the programs thereby explain human cognition” (Searle, 1980, p.
417), and later clarified his definition: “the appropriately programmed
digital computer with the right inputs and outputs would thereby have a
mind in exactly the sense that human beings have minds” (Searle, 1988, p.
136). The 1980 article appeared in Behavioral and Brain Sciences, the
flagship journal of cognitive science, and BBS, as it is known, has a special
format: each issue contains several long “target articles” accompanied by
several-dozen commentaries by experts in the field and a response by the
author(s). Since BBS is energetically interdisciplinary, these experts
typically come from a variety of disciplines, giving the reader a useful and
timely cross section of reactions. Seeing how—and whether—these other
experts take the target article seriously is a great way of gauging how to use
or ignore it in your own work. You also can learn a lot about the difficulties
of interdisciplinary communication, with very confident people furiously
talking past each other, or participating in academic tag team wrestling of
the highest caliber. Searle’s target article provoked a fire storm of rebuttal,
including mine (Dennett, 1980), in which I coined the term “intuition
pump,” in the service of trying to show what was deeply misleading about
his thought experiment.
   It was my term, but credit should also be given to Doug Hofstadter, for
my coinage grew out of discussions with him about Searle’s essay, which
we reprinted, with commentary, in our anthology, The Mind’s I (Hofstadter
and Dennett, 1981). We found his thought experiment fascinating because it
was, on the one hand, so clearly a fallacious and misleading argument, yet,
on the other hand, just as clearly a tremendous crowd-pleaser and
persuader. How—and why—did it work? We looked at it from the point of

=== p. 283 ===

view of reverse engineering, and Doug came up with the tactic of “turning
all the knobs” to see what makes it work. Is the story robust under
deformation, or does it critically depend on details that ought to be
optional?1
   That was over thirty years ago, and I must grant that Searle’s Chinese
Room has had tremendous appeal and staying power. It is a classic,
presented in probably thousands of undergraduate courses and debated over
and over to this day. I have used it for years in my own classes, and have
learned a lot about how it works and how to show people what’s wrong with
it.2
   For it is, I will now show, a defective intuition pump, a boom crutch that
can disable your imagination unless you handle it very carefully. But before
I turn to that delicate task, I want to acknowledge that many of you are
probably silently rolling your eyes, or even groaning. You don’t want me to
disable this device; you like the conclusion so much—Strong AI is
impossible, whew!—that your eyes glaze over at the prospect of being
dragged through a meticulous critique of a vivid, entertaining argument
that supports your fervent hope. I used to respond to this reaction with
scorn. Those of you responding this way love the fact that an eminent
Berkeley professor has a famous argument that purports to show that you
are right, and you are happy to take it on his authority. The details don’t
really interest you, only the conclusion. What an anti-intellectual copout!
   But then I caught myself doing much the same thing and reconsidered
my harsh verdict. I confess that I have always found quantum mechanics
somehow repellent, deeply disorienting, and even, well, something I would
prefer not to be true! I know that it is stunningly successful at predicting
and explaining many phenomena, including everyday phenomena such as
the reflection and refraction of light, and the operation of the proteins in
our retinas that permit us to see. It lies at the very heart of science, but it is
famously hard to make sense of, even by the experts. My several attempts
to master the mathematics of quantum mechanics have failed, so I am an
interested but ultimately incompetent bystander on the scientific
controversies surrounding its interpretation, but this hasn’t prevented me
from being deeply suspicious of much that has been said about this by
supposedly knowledgeable experts. And then I read Murray Gell-Man’s
book The Quark and the Jaguar: Adventures in the Simple and the Complex
(1995, a science book for nonspecialists like me. To my delight, Gell-Mann

=== p. 284 ===

adopts a no-nonsense, demystifying tone, and just beats the daylights out of
some of the more dubious pronouncements that have gained favor. (Read
his chapter “Quantum Mechanics and Flapdoodle” to see what I mean.) I
found myself thinking, “Hit them again, Murray! Sock it to them!” Here
was a world-famous Nobel laureate physicist supporting my prejudice,
using arguments that I understood. This was my kind of quantum physics!
But then it hit me. Did I really understand his arguments, or just sorta
understand them? Could I be sure that I wasn’t just falling for his rhetoric?
I hoped there weren’t other physicists who would want to drag me back
through the technicalities, showing me that I had been taken in by this
authoritative dismissal. I liked his conclusion so much I didn’t have any
stomach for the details. Same copout.
   But not quite. I have conscientiously tried to assess Gell-Mann’s verdicts
in the light of what others have written since (and so far, so good). And I
remain open to the distinct possibility that Gell-Mann’s “common sense,”
which I find so appealing, will turn out some day to be one more case of
failure of imagination instead of deep insight. I would beg you to attempt
to adopt the same open-minded attitude toward my effort to dismantle and
neutralize Searle’s Chinese Room. I’ll make the bitter pill as palatable as I
   Way back in 1950 Alan Turing had proposed what he claimed would be
the acid test of intelligence in a machine, now known as the Turing test, in
which a judge has a probing conversation with two entities, one a human
being and the other a computer, both hidden from view and communicating
by “teletype” (think: screen and keyboard). The human being tries to
demonstrate her genuine humanity to the judge, and the computer tries to
fool the judge into thinking that it is the human being. If the judge can’t
reliably tell the difference, the computer (program) has passed the Turing
test and would be declared not just to be intelligent, but to “have a mind in
exactly the sense that human beings have minds,” as Searle put it in 1988.
Passing the Turing test would be, in the eyes of many in the field, the
vindication of Strong AI. Why? Because, they thought (along with Turing),
you can’t have such a conversation without understanding it, so the success
of the computer conversationalist would be proof of its understanding.3
Notice that the Turing test doesn’t—can’t—distinguish between a zimbo
and a “really conscious” person, since whatever a conscious person can do,
a zimbo can do exactly as well. As many have remarked, the claim that an

=== p. 285 ===

entity that passes the Turing test is not just intelligent but conscious flies in
the face of the Zombic Hunch. This may seem all by itself to disqualify
the Turing test as a good test of mind, but we should reserve judgment on
that until we look at the details. The program that passes the Turing test
may have only a zimbo’s stream of unconsciousness where we have a
stream of consciousness, but we have just seen a challenge to the Zombic
Hunch that insists that this marks a real difference. Is the zimbo program
only sorta conscious? In what dimension, exactly, does it fall short?
Perhaps Searle’s intuition pump will shed light on that question: it appears
to be a reductio ad absurdum argument to discredit the idea of Strong AI.
   He invites us to imagine him locked in a room, hand-simulating a giant
AI program, which putatively understands Chinese. He stipulates that the
program passes the Turing test, foiling all attempts by human interlocutors
to distinguish it from a genuine understander of Chinese. Searle, who
knows no Chinese, locked in the room and busily manipulating the symbol
strings according to the program, doesn’t thereby gain understanding of
Chinese (obviously), and there is nothing else in the room that understands
Chinese either. (It is empty, aside from Searle and the “bits of paper” on
which Searle’s instructions are written. By following them precisely he is
“hand-simulating” the giant program.) If Searle doesn’t understand
Chinese, surely (ding!) Searle plus bits of paper doesn’t understand
Chinese. Ergo, there is no understanding of Chinese in the Chinese Room,
in spite of its conversational prowess, which is good enough to fool native
Chinese-speakers. Searle, like a computer, identifies the Chinese symbols
by their shape only; they are just different meaningless “squiggles” to him
and to a computer, so Searle-in-the-Chinese-Room just is an
implementation of the computer program at issue. It does its job without
any understanding of Chinese, whether it is running on silicon or on Searle.
   This is so simple and convincing! Can there possibly be anything wrong
with this thought experiment? Well, yes. When Searle presented it at
Berkeley, the computer scientists retorted with what Searle calls the
Systems Reply (Berkeley):
          While it is true that the individual person who is locked in the
          room does not understand the story, the fact is that he is merely
          part of the whole system, and the system does understand the
          story. The person has a large ledger in front of him in which are
          written the rules, he has a lot of scratch paper and pencils for

=== p. 286 ===

          doing calculations, he has “data banks” of sets of Chinese
          symbols. Now, understanding is not being ascribed to the mere
          individual; rather it is being ascribed to this whole system of
          which he is a part. [Searle, 1980, p. 419]
Searle says something very telling in the course of responding to this reply:
          Actually I feel somewhat embarrassed . . . because the theory
          seems to me so implausible to start with. The idea is that while a
          person doesn’t understand Chinese, somehow the conjunction of
          that person and bits of paper might understand Chinese. It is not
          easy for me to imagine how someone who was not in the grip of
          an ideology would find the idea at all plausible. [Searle, 1980, p.
   What Searle finds so implausible is nothing other than the fundamental
insight Turing had when he created the idea of a stored-program computer!
The competence is all in the software. Recall that the register machine in
chapter 24 doesn’t understand arithmetic at all, but the register machine in
conjunction with the software does perfect arithmetic. The central
processing unit in your laptop doesn’t know anything about chess, but when
it is running a chess program, it can beat you at chess, and so forth, for all
the magnificent competences of your laptop. What Searle describes as an
ideology is at the very heart of computer science, and its soundness is
demonstrated in every walk of life. The way to reproduce human
competence and hence comprehension (eventually) is to stack virtual
machines on top of virtual machines on top of virtual machines—the power
is in the system, not in the underlying hardware. Darwin’s “strange
inversion of reasoning” is nicely echoed by Turing’s strange inversion of
reasoning (Dennett, forthcoming): whereas we used to think (before
Turing) that human competence had to flow from comprehension (that
mysterious fount of intelligence), we now appreciate that comprehension
itself is an effect created (bubbling up) from a host of competences piled
on competences.
   Details matter. Searle never tells his reader at what level he is hand-simulating the giant AI program. This is his account of what it is like when
he works through the program:
          Now suppose that after this first batch of Chinese writing [the
          input] I am given a second batch of Chinese script together with a

=== p. 287 ===

         set of rules for correlating the second batch with the first batch.
         The rules are in English, and I understand these rules as well as
         any other native speaker of English. They enable me to correlate
         one set of formal symbols with another set of formal symbols. . . .
         Now suppose also that I am given a third batch of Chinese
         symbols together with some instructions, again in English, that
         enable me to correlate elements of this batch with the first two
         batches, and these rules instruct me how to give back certain
         Chinese symbols with certain sorts of shapes in response to
         certain sorts of shapes given me in the third batch. [Searle, 1980,
         p. 418]
   He contrasts this “correlation” between “batches of symbols” with what
happens when instead an English sentence or story is input, and he responds
in his native English.
         From the external point of view—from the point of view of
         somebody reading my “answers”—the answers to the Chinese
         questions and the English questions are equally good. But in the
         Chinese case, unlike the English case, I produce the answers by
         manipulating uninterpreted formal symbols. [Searle, 1980, p.
What a contrast! But look what Searle has still left out. We know he gets
his “set of rules” (instructions) in English, but are they along the lines of
“add the contents of register 39021192 to the contents of register
215845085” (machine code), or “Define a constant: queue-size and set it at
100” (source code)? Is he down in the basement, doing arithmetic at a
furious rate (trillions of operations per second), or is he following the
source code of a program, implemented many layers higher? And if he’s
following the source code, does he get to read any comments? Better not,
since they are not officially part of the program, and they would give him
lots of hints about what was going on (“This parses the sentence, yielding
nouns, pronouns, verbs, and modifiers, and identifies it as a question,
declarative, imperative or interjection,” and then, a few billion operations
later, “pun discovered; switch to repartee mode . . . ,” and then a more
detailed set of billions of operations, in which references are refined,
alternative answers are evaluated rather like different chess moves, and
then finally an output sentence is generated). If the program Searle is hand-

=== p. 288 ===

simulating is able to carry on an impressive conversation in Chinese, it will
have to consult huge data banks not just of “sets of Chinese symbols,” as he
puts it, but of everyday knowledge that Chinese speakers share, and that is
the least of it. When Searle hand-simulates, does he get any hints of all this
layered cognitive activity, or is it just a whole lot of arithmetic to him?
   Think of how Searle would handle the following question in English:
          Imagine taking a capital letter D and turning it counterclockwise
          90 degrees on its side. Now place it on top of a capital letter J.
          What sort of weather does that remind you of?
Now imagine that Searle is given an analogous challenge in Chinese when
he is hard at work in the Chinese Room.
          On June 4, 2012, the following posting of characters was blocked
          on Sohu Weibo [a Chinese blogging service]. Can you figure out
          why?

   These are actual Chinese characters (Searle’s “squiggles”), but the
sequence is utter gibberish. Why would it be blocked by the authorities?
Because June 4 is the anniversary of the Tiananmen Square massacre in
which hundreds of protesters were killed by the army. (“June 4” is as
evocative to the Chinese as “9/11” is to Americans.) The most famous
images that emerged were of a single brave man who faced down the tanks.
You can see him (      means person) confronting four tanks on the left,
which then roll over him and over him and over him and then leave at the
right.4
   The Chinese Room ought to “get it,” but unless Searle had access to the
comments on the source code, he would be none the wiser, since it would
never be apparent to him that his rule-following was framing a “mental
image” and manipulating it and then using the result as a probe of memory.
That is, the system would go through a set of activities before responding to
the Chinese question that are strikingly parallel to the activities Searle went
through knowingly to respond to the English question. You could say that
the system has a mind of its own, unimagined by Searle, toiling away in the
engine room.
   Any program capable of passing the Turing test would have to go
through “mental” operations that very closely mimicked the mental

=== p. 289 ===

operations we go through in the course of a conversation. Suppose, for
instance, the questioner in the Turing test began tutoring the candidate in
quantum physics, using the Socratic question-and-answer method, giving
the student simple problems to solve. Searle, in the engine room, would be
obliged to take the system through elaborate intellectual exercises in order
to hold up its end of the conversation, but Searle would emerge from the
ordeal as uncomprehending of quantum physics as when he went in. The
system, in contrast, would now have a much better working understanding
of the field than it had before the Turing test began, because it had done the
exercises. This particular instance of the Turing test would install a new
virtual machine in the program: the simple quantum physics machine.
   Such facts are completely obscured by Searle’s image of “bits of paper”
and “rules” that permit him to “correlate” Chinese symbols. I’m not saying
that Searle deliberately concealed the complexity of the program he
imagined he was hand-simulating, but just that he ignored the implications
of the complexity. If you think of the program as a relatively simple bunch
of rules, then, like Bateson thinking of “particles of chromatin,
indistinguishable from each other and indeed almost homogeneous under
any known test,” you are likely to find the purported comprehension
powers of programs, like the powers of DNA, “inconceivable.”
   Look at what we’ve just done. We’ve turned the knob on Searle’s
intuition pump that controls the level of description of the program being
followed. There are always many levels. At the highest level, the
comprehending powers of the system are not unimaginable; we even get
insight into just how the system comes to understand what it does. The
system’s reply no longer looks embarrassing; it looks obviously correct.
That doesn’t mean that AI of the sort Searle was criticizing actually
achieves a level of competence worth calling understanding, nor that those
methods, extended in the ways then imagined by those AI researchers,
would likely have led to such high competences, but just that Searle’s
thought experiment doesn’t succeed in what it claims to accomplish:
demonstrating the flat-out impossibility of Strong AI.
   There are other knobs to turn, but that task has been carried out
extensively in the huge literature the Chinese Room has provoked. Here I
am concentrating on the thinking tool itself, not the theories and
propositions it was aimed at, and showing that it is a defective tool: it
persuades by clouding our imagination, not exploiting it well.

=== p. 290 ===

1 Doug zeroed in on the phrase “bits of paper” in Searle’s essay, and showed how it encouraged
people to underestimate the size and complexity of the software involved by many orders of
magnitude. His commentary on Searle in our book featured this criticism, and led to a ferocious
response from Searle (1982) in the pages of the New York Review of Books, because, although we
had reprinted his article correctly, in his commentary Doug slipped and wrote “a few slips” where
Searle had said “bits,” and this, Searle claimed, completely misrepresented his argument! If Searle
is right about this, if that small inadvertent mutation transformed the machinery, this actually
proved our point, in a way: if such a tiny adjustment disables or enables a thought experiment, that
is something that should be drawn to the attention of all whose intuitions are up for pumping.
2 Check out Hofstadter’s own virtuoso demonstration in The Mind’s I (Hofstadter and Dennett,
1981), showing that the Chinese Room is an intuition pump with (at least) five knobs, which he
proceeds to turn, one at a time, to derive a family of different thought experiments with different
invited conclusions. In the closing reflections, I noted,
            Each setting of the dials on our intuition pump yields a slightly different narrative,
            with different problems receding into the background and different morals drawn.
            Which version or versions should be trusted is a matter to settle by examining them
            carefully, to see which features of the narrative are doing the work. If the
            oversimplifications are the source of the intuitions, rather than just devices for
            suppressing irrelevant complications, we should mistrust the conclusions we are
            invited to draw. [p. 460]

3 As has often been pointed out, this conviction echoes that of Descartes, who proposed in his
Discourse on Method way back in 1637 that the best way to tell a machine from a person with an
immaterial soul was to have a conversation with it.
            It is indeed conceivable that a machine could be so made that it would utter words,
            and even words appropriate to the presence of physical acts or objects which cause
            some change in its organs; as, for example, if it was touched in some spot that it
            would ask what you wanted to say to it; if in another, that it would cry that it was
            hurt, and so on for similar things. But it could never modify its phrases to reply to the
            sense of whatever was said in its presence, as even the most stupid men can do.

Nobody knows if Turing got the inspiration for his intuition pump from Descartes’s intuition
pump.
4 Thanks to linguist, sinologist, and polymath David Moser for the example, which was created in
China just as I was casting about for such an example.

=== p. 291 ===

61. THE TELECLONE FALL FROM MARS TO EARTH

You see the moon rise in the east. You see the moon rise in the west. You
watch two moons moving toward each other across the cold black sky, one
soon to pass behind the other as they continue on their way. You are on
Mars, millions of miles from home, protected from the killing, frostless
cold of the red Martian desert by fragile membranes of terrestrial
technology—protected but stranded, for your spaceship has broken down
beyond repair. You will never ever return to Earth, to the friends and family
and places you left behind.
   But perhaps there is hope. In the communication compartment of the
disabled craft, you find a Teleclone Mark IV teleporter and instructions for
its use. If you turn the teleporter on, tune its beam to the Teleclone receiver
on Earth, and then step into the sending chamber, the teleporter will swiftly
and painlessly dismantle your body, producing a molecule-by-molecule
blueprint to be beamed to Earth, where the receiver, its reservoirs well
stocked with the requisite atoms, will almost instantaneously produce—
from the beamed instructions—you! Whisked back to Earth at the speed of
light, into the arms of your loved ones, who will soon be listening with rapt
attention to your tales of adventures on Mars.
   One last survey of the damaged spaceship convinces you that the
Teleclone is your only hope. With nothing to lose, you set the transmitter
up, flip the right switches, and step into the chamber. Five, four, three, two,
one, FLASH! You open the door in front of you and step out of the
Teleclone receiver chamber into the sunny, familiar atmosphere of Earth.
You’ve come home, none the worse for wear after your long-distance
Teleclone fall from Mars. Your narrow escape from a terrible fate on the
red planet calls for a celebration, and as your family and friends gather
around, you notice how everyone has changed since last you saw them. It
has been almost three years, after all, and you’ve all grown older. Look at
Sarah, your daughter, who must now be eight and a half. You find yourself
thinking, “Can this be the little girl who used to sit on my lap?” Of course
it is, you reflect, even though you must admit that you do not so much
recognize her as extrapolate from memory and deduce her identity. She is
so much taller, looks so much older, and knows so much more. In fact,
most of the cells now in her body were not there when last you cast eyes on

=== p. 292 ===

her. But in spite of growth and change, in spite of replacement of cells,
she’s the same little person you kissed good-bye three years ago.
   Then it hits you: “Am I, really, the same person who kissed this little girl
good-bye three years ago? Am I this eight-year-old child’s mother or am I
actually a brand new human being, only several hours old, in spite of my
memories—or apparent memories—of days and years before that?” Did
this child’s mother recently die on Mars, dismantled and destroyed in the
chamber of a Teleclone Mark IV?
   Did I die on Mars? No, certainly I did not die on Mars, since I am alive
on Earth. Perhaps, though, someone died on Mars—Sarah’s mother. Then I
am not Sarah’s mother. But I must be! The whole point of getting into the
Teleclone was to return home to my family. But I keep forgetting; maybe I
never got into that Teleclone on Mars. Maybe that was someone else—if it
ever happened at all.
   Is that infernal machine a teleporter—a mode of transportation—or, as
the brand name suggests, a sort of murdering twinmaker? Did Sarah’s
mother survive the experience with the Teleclone or not? She thought she
was going to. She entered the chamber with hope and anticipation, not
suicidal resignation. Her act was altruistic, to be sure—she was taking steps
to provide Sarah with a loved one to protect her—but also selfish—she was
getting herself out of a jam and into something pleasant. Or so it seemed.
“How do I know that’s how it seemed? Because I was there; I was Sarah’s
mother thinking those thoughts. I am Sarah’s mother. Or so it seems.”
   A song or a poem or a movie can undoubtedly be teleported. Is a self the
sort of thing—a thing “made of information”—that can be teleported
without loss? Is our reluctance to admit the teleportation of people a bit
like the anachronistic resistance, recently overcome in most quarters, to
electronically scanned legal signatures on documents? (I learned in 2011
that Harvard University’s Society of Fellows would not accept a scanned
signature on my letter of recommendation; they required some dry ink that
had actually been laid down by the motion of my actual hand, and it took
me half a day of riding around in taxis in Beirut to get, sign, and express-mail back the relevant form—on cream-colored bond paper. It is my
understanding that the Society has now changed its policy, but I hope
Harvard still insists on putting wax seals on their diplomas. There is a place
for tradition, in all its glorious gratuitousness.)

=== p. 293 ===

62. THE SELF AS THE CENTER OF NARRATIVE GRAVITY

What is a self? Philosophers have been grappling with this question for
centuries. The Christian concept of an immortal soul, immaterial and
inexplicable, captivated thinkers and deflected serious investigation for
centuries, but it is losing adherents daily. The idea of a mind-thingy that
goes to Heaven when somebody dies grows more incoherent every day. The
wishful thinking that prevents us from just discarding it, along with the
goblins and witches, is only too apparent. So those of us who are
materialists, confident that the mind is the brain (properly understood),
have to confront the question of why it seems that each of us has some such
mind-thingy, or better: that each of us is some such mind-thingy inhabiting
a body, and more particularly a brain. Do we simply find our selves when
we look inside?
  David Hume famously disparaged this idea in 1739:
          For my part, when I enter most intimately into what I call myself,
          I always stumble on some particular perception or other, of heat
          or cold, light or shade, love or hatred, pain or pleasure. I never
          can catch myself at any time without a perception. . . . If anyone,
          upon serious and unprejudiced reflection, thinks he has a
          different notion of himself, I must confess I can reason no longer
          with him. All I can allow him is, that he may be in the right as
          well as I, and that we are essentially different in this particular.
          He may, perhaps, perceive something simple and continued,
          which he calls himself; though I am certain there is no such
          principle in me. [1964, I, iv, sect. 6]
   Hume’s tongue-in-cheek acknowledgment that others may be different
echoes to this day among those who muse about whether I, for instance, am
a zombie (a zimbo, of course) innocently extrapolating from my own
impoverished experience to how it is with others. An amusing conjecture,
but I don’t think anybody takes it seriously.
   It is clear what a self isn’t. It isn’t a part of the brain, like the amygdala
or hippocampus. The frontal lobes play a crucial role in evaluating
situations, intentions, perceptions, and the like, but I don’t think anybody
has made the mistake of locating the self in the frontal lobes. (A prefrontal

=== p. 294 ===

lobotomy is a dire surgery, leaving behind someone who really is “a
shadow of his former self,” but it isn’t a self-ectomy. As the old joke has it,
I’d rather have a free bottle in front of me than a prefrontal lobotomy, but
in either case I’d be there to experience it.) Then what might the self be? I
propose that it is the same kind of thing as a center of gravity, an
abstraction that is, in spite of its abstractness, tightly coupled to the
physical world. You, like every other material object, have a center of
gravity (or more properly a center of mass, but we’ll ignore that nicety
here). If you are top-heavy, your center of gravity is higher than average for
people of your height, you have to work harder to stay upright, and so forth.
There are many ways of locating your center of gravity, which, depending
on such factors as the shoes you have on and when you last ate a meal,
moves around in a smallish area in the middle of your body. It is a
mathematical point, not an atom or molecule. The center of gravity of a
length of steel pipe is not made of steel and indeed is not made of anything.
It is a point in space, the point on the midline running through the center of
the pipe that is equidistant from the ends (roughly, depending on
imperfections, etc.).
   The concept of a center of gravity is a very useful thinking tool in its
own right. In effect it averages over all the gravitational attractions
between every particle of matter in a thing and every particle of matter on
the planet, and tells us that we can boil all that down to two points—the
center of the earth (its center of gravity) and the center of gravity of the
thing—and calculate the behavior of the thing under varying conditions.
For instance, if a thing’s center of gravity at any time falls outside all the
points of its supporting base, it will topple. Of course, we had an intuitive
understanding of centers of gravity long before Newton figured out gravity.
(“Sit down! You’re rocking the boat.”) Now we can explain how and why
the concept works in detail, and if we’re designing vehicles or floor lamps,
for example, the goal of lowering a center of gravity, or moving it to a more
effective location, shows the near indispensability of the concept in many
of our activities. It may be a “theorist’s fiction,” but it is a very valuable
fiction from which a lot of true predictions can be generated. Can such an
abstract entity, having no material existence, actually cause anything? Not
directly, but explanations that cite a center of gravity compete with
explanations that are clearly causal. Why didn’t that coffee mug tip over

=== p. 295 ===

when the sailboat heeled so drastically? “Because it has an unusually low
center of gravity” competes with “Because it is glued to the deck.”
   We may call a center of gravity a theorist’s fiction because it shares with
fictional characters the curious property of indeterminacy of properties.
Sherlock Holmes, as described by Arthur Conan Doyle in the Sherlock
Holmes mystery stories, has many properties, but where Conan Doyle was
silent, there is no fact of the matter. We can extrapolate a bit: The author
never mentions Sherlock having a third nostril, so we are entitled to assume
that he didn’t (Lewis, 1978). We can also agree that he was not a bigamist
with one wife in Paris and another in New York. But for many such
questions there is no answer: Did he have a mole on his left shoulder blade?
Was he a first cousin of Oscar Wilde? Did he own a cottage in Scotland?
These questions and kazillions more about any real human being must have
true answers, even if we can never discover them. Not so for Sherlock;
being fictional he has only properties his author says or implies that he has.
A naïve reader who thinks the Sherlock Holmes stories are true might
wonder whether the conductor on the train to Aldershot was taller or
shorter than Holmes, but if you understand what fiction is, you know better
than to ask. The same is true of centers of gravity. If you wondered whether
they might eventually “turn out to be neutrinos,” you would be missing the
point of them as theorist’s fictions.
   What then is a center of narrative gravity? It is also a theorist’s fiction,
posited in order to unify and make sense of an otherwise bafflingly
complex collection of actions, utterances, fidgets, complaints, promises,
and so forth, that make up a person. It is the organizer of the personal level
of explanation. Your hand didn’t sign the contract; you did. Your mouth
didn’t tell the lie; you did. Your brain doesn’t remember Paris; you do. You
are the “owner of record” of the living body we recognize as you. (As we
say, it’s your body to do with what you like.) In the same way that we can
simplify all the gravitational attractions between all the parts of the world
and an obelisk standing on the ground by boiling it down to two points, the
center of the earth and the center of gravity of the obelisk, we can simplify
all the interactions—the handshakes, the spoken words, the ink scrawls, and
much more—between two selves, the seller and the buyer, who have just
completed a transaction. Each self is a person, with a biography, a
“backstory,” and many ongoing projects. Unlike centers of gravity, selves

=== p. 296 ===

don’t just have trajectories through space and time; they gather as they go,
accumulating memories and devising plans and expectations.
   There are parts of the backstory that each person would probably wish to
disavow, but what’s done is done; that part of the narrative cannot be
revised. It can be reinterpreted, however, in the light of later biographical
elements. “I wasn’t myself when I did that,” is a familiar refrain, and our
tolerance for this apparently self-contradictory claim is often wise. What
the person means is that he was in an extreme “out of character” state when
he did that, and he is imploring us not to judge him in the present or
extrapolate from that behavior into the future. Sometimes this is very
plausible, sometimes not. Another familiar move: “Well, if you didn’t do
that, who did?” “The devil made me do it.” Again, we often accept this
claim, not on its face value, but as a sincere disavowal of the character and
motivations that guided the action. This raises issues about responsibility
and free will that we will tackle in the next chapter; just note, for now, how
we need the concept of the self to draw a line (however arbitrary it may
often turn out to be) between what you do and what happens to you.
   Every physical object has a center of gravity and every living human
body has a self, or rather, every living human body is owned by a self, a
sort of live-in manager. Only one owner? Could a body be shared by two or
more selves? The condition known as dissociative identity disorder (it used
to be called multiple personality disorder) is apparently an example of
many selves sharing a single body, with a dominant self (the “host”) and a
group of “alters.” I say “apparently” because controversy rages about the
diagnosis, running from outright fraud through folie à deux (in which a
naïve psychiatrist unintentionally encourages a troubled patient to develop
the symptoms) to acceptance of a few rare and genuine cases surrounded by
various flavors of wannabes. After studying the phenomenon (and the
people studying and treating the phenomenon) for several years,
psychologist Nicholas Humphrey and I (1989) decided that everyone is
right! There are frauds, exaggerations, gullible therapists with eager
patients, and yes, a few cases in which the condition seems to have existed
in at least rudimentary form prior to any elaboration at the hands of a
fascinated interlocutor. This is not surprising, when we recognize that it is
an intensification of something quite normal that we all experience to
various degrees. Most of us lead several fairly distinct lives, at work, at

=== p. 297 ===

home, at play, and acquire habits and memories in each context that turn
out not to travel well to other contexts.
   As sociologist Erving Goffman (1959) recounted in his classic book on
the subject, The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life, we all engage in
presenting ourselves as characters in real-life dramas (Professor Dennett,
Dan from up the road, Dad, Grandpa, etc.), and we effortlessly enlist the
help of the supporting cast, who are similarly presenting themselves. We
feed each other lines we can handle readily, becoming complicit in each
other’s campaign of self-presentation, or we can disrupt these smoothly
running scenarios by playing out of character, with results that are
awkward, comic, or worse. It takes nerves of steel to do this. Can you
imagine asking a person newly introduced to you at a party to show you
some identification, a driver’s license, perhaps, or a passport—or, heading
in the other direction, attempting to give her a passionate embrace? When
people are put in extremely difficult positions, they sometimes adopt
extreme measures, and what starts out as feigning in desperation becomes
almost second nature. When the going gets tough, you simply depart,
leaving behind a different center of narrative gravity, a different character,
better equipped to deal with the problem at hand.
   Humphrey and I learned that when you interview a putative sufferer of
dissociative identity disorder, expect to find a naïve virtuoso in the art of
deflecting obtrusive inquiry. To raise the questions that cry out for answers1
or—better—to set little traps to see whether one alter really doesn’t have
any memories of what the other alter was doing and saying, you will have
to be downright rude, and risk giving serious offense, so in all likelihood
you will find yourself politely going along with the gag, an accomplice
enlisted without so much as a wink. Con artists do this deliberately, with
great skill, but so do innocent victims of this personality disorder, without
any recognition of what they are doing. So do we all, to one degree or
another. But their alters are just fictional characters, right? The real person
is the host, right? Well, it isn’t quite that straightforward.
   That thing that is you, the person you play, whether you play multiple
roles or really just one monolithic role, is your center of narrative gravity.
It is how your friends recognize you (“You’re not yourself today!”), and
how you see yourself for the most part, but it is also somewhat idealized
(“Oh my God! Did I do that? I would never do that!”). Professional
novelists, like con artists, create narratives with cunning and deliberate

=== p. 298 ===

attention to the details. The rest of us are talented amateurs, spinning our
tales cleverly but (in the main) unwittingly, rather the way a spider spins a
web. It is nature, not art. It is not so much that we, using our brains, spin
our yarns, as that our brains, using yarns, spin us. There is a core of
undeniable true biography, to be sure, but over the years large parts of it
become as good as gone, inert and of no relevance to who you are now.
Some of it you may actively disavow, jettison, “forget,” in the process of
self-maintenance and self-improvement.2
   Consider how easily you can answer some questions about your past.
Have you ever danced with a movie star? Have you ever been to Paris?
Have you ever ridden a camel? Have you ever strangled somebody to death
with your bare hands? These are easy for almost all of us, whether the
answer is yes or no. (Imagine someone who was asked the last question and
who paused, thoughtfully, scratching his chin, before answering. Give him a
wide berth!) We know the answers to these questions because we know
enough about ourselves—our selves—to know that had we ever danced
with a movie star, been to Paris, ridden a camel, or strangled someone,
we’d now be recollecting it. When “nothing comes to mind,” we interpret
this absence as a negative. (How else could we be so sure? Do you keep a
list of all the things you’ve never done? All the places you’ve never been?)
Contrast those questions with these superficially similar questions: Have
you ever danced with a person named Smith? Have you ever been to a drug
store that sold floor polish? Have you ever ridden in a blue Chevrolet?
Have you ever broken a white coffee mug? Some may be easy to answer,
and others may lead you to say you have no idea, and some may inspire you
to give false answers without realizing it, just because they are so
unimportant. Why would you remember it if you had done any of these
things? A lot that has happened to us is just not memorable; a lot of things
that we have done, good and bad, have been shed by our centers of narrative
gravity; and a lot that never happened has been added, innocently enough,
because for one reason or another it just fits us to a t. What you are is that
rolling sum of experience and talent, solemn intention and daydreaming
fantasy, bound together in one brain and body and called by a given name.
The idea that there is, in addition, a special indissoluble nugget of you, or
ego, or spirit, or soul, is an attractive fantasy, but nothing that we need in
order to make sense of people, their dreams and hopes, their heroism and
their sins.

=== p. 299 ===

   This center of narrative gravity may not be a mysterious nugget of mind
stuff, but if it is just an abstraction, can it be studied scientifically? Yes, it

1 Such as: How do you folks decide who is host and who are alters? How have you explained to
yourself that your memory of recent experiences consists of brief episodes of being there
surrounded by hours or days of oblivion? Doesn’t that strike you as alarming?
2 In T. S. Eliot’s verse play, Murder in the Cathedral, Becket is asked about an event in his past
and he replies:
             You talk of seasons that are past. I remember
             Not worth forgetting.

=== p. 300 ===

63. HETEROPHENOMENOLOGY

Heterophenomenology is not an intuition pump, but another example of
staging that is well worth putting in place before we tackle some difficult
questions. The study of human consciousness involves phenomena that at
first glance seem to occur in something rather like another dimension: the
private, subjective, “first-person” dimension that each of us occupies with
regard to our own consciousness, and to which nobody else can gain direct
access. What, then, is the relation between the standard “third-person”
objective methodologies for studying meteors or magnets (or human
metabolism or bone density), and the methodologies for studying human
consciousness? Do we have to create some radical or revolutionary
alternative science, or can the standard methods be extended in such a way
as to do justice to the phenomena of human consciousness? I defend the
claim that there is a straightforward, conservative extension of objective
science that handsomely covers all the ground of human consciousness,
doing justice to all the data without ever having to abandon the rules and
constraints of the experimental methods that have worked so well in the
rest of science. This third-person methodology, heterophenomenology
(phenomenology of an other not oneself), is the sound way to take the first-person point of view as seriously as it can legitimately be taken.
   Why the multisyllabic name? “Phenomenology” originally meant a
catalogue of phenomena, of one sort or another, before there is a good
theory of them. In the sixteenth century, William Gilbert compiled a good
phenomenology of magnetism, but it was centuries before all the magnetic
phenomena he carefully described could be explained. In the early
twentieth century, Edmund Husserl, and a group of psychologists and
philosophers influenced by him, adopted the term, “Phenomenology” (with
a capital “P”), for a presumably scientific study of the phenomena of
subjective experience, to be observed using a “first-person” introspective
method that attempted to be theory-neutral and without presuppositions.
The school of thought continues to this day, embattled or ignored for the
most part, for reasons good and bad. In spite of some very tantalizing
results, well worth further exploration, as a first-person approach it has
been shunned by objective, empirical science, which insists on data that can
be accessible to all investigators. But we can study consciousness

=== p. 301 ===

objectively, and the method is really just a simple twist on Phenomenology,
so I call it heterophenomenology, to contrast it with Husserlian
autophenomenology. Heterophenomenology is the study of first-person
phenomena from the third-person point of view of objective science.
   Obviously the key difference between experiments with rocks, roses, and
rats on the one hand, and experiments with awake, cooperative human
subjects on the other, is that the latter can communicate in language and
hence can collaborate with experimenters, by making suggestions,
interacting verbally, and telling them what it is like under various
controlled conditions. That is the core of heterophenomenology: it exploits
our capacity to perform and interpret speech acts, yielding a catalogue of
what the subject believes to be true about his or her conscious experience.
This catalogue of beliefs fleshes out the subject’s heterophenomenological
world, the world according to S, the subjective world of one subject. The
total set of details of heterophenomenology, plus all the data we can gather
about concurrent events in the brains of subjects and in the surrounding
environment, comprise the total data set a theory of human consciousness
must explain. It leaves out no objective phenomena and no subjective
phenomena of consciousness.
   The interpretation required to turn raw data about speech sounds and
button pressings into reports and expressions of beliefs involves adopting
the intentional stance: it requires the working hypothesis that the subject
is an agent whose actions are rationally guided by beliefs and desires that
are themselves rational, given the subject’s perceptual history and needs.
For instance, the constraints of the intentional stance can be clearly
discerned in the standard precautions taken in such experiments to prevent
subjects from having experiences that might give them either beliefs or
desires that would tend to bias their responses in ways that would distort
our interpretation of their actions: we keep them in the dark about what we
hope they will say, for instance, while at the same time taking steps to
assure ourselves that they understand the tasks we set them. This adoption
of the intentional stance is not an irreparably subjective and relativistic
affair. Rules of interpretation can be articulated; standards of
intersubjective agreement on interpretation can be set and met; deviations
can be identified; the unavoidable assumption of rationality can be
cautiously couched and treated as an adjustable, defensible, and

=== p. 302 ===

evolutionarily explicable assumption. (The details of these processes are
articulated in Dennett, 1991a.)
   This is not a proposal for a new methodology for studying consciousness.
I am just being self-conscious about the standard methods already adopted
by researchers in cognitive psychology, psychophysics (which studies the
relationships between physical stimuli and subjective reactions), and
neuroscience, and explaining and defending them. These methods, correctly
understood and followed, obviate the need for any radical or revolutionary
“first-person” science of consciousness, and leave no residual phenomena
of consciousness inaccessible to controlled scientific study.
   What kinds of things does this methodology commit us to? Beyond the
unproblematic things all of science is committed to (neurons and electrons,
clocks and microscopes), it commits us just to beliefs—the beliefs
expressed by subjects and deemed constitutive of their subjectivity—and to
desires—the desires to cooperate with the experimenters, and to tell them
the truth as candidly as possible. (An important part of the method involves
controlling these beliefs and desires, and any experimental result that
shows evidence of failure to do this must be discarded.) What kind of
things are beliefs and desires? We may stay maximally noncommittal about
this—pending the confirmation of theory—by treating beliefs and their
contents or objects as theorists’ fictions or abstractions similar to centers
of mass, the equator, and parallelograms of forces.
   Mermaid-sightings are real events, however misdescribed, whereas
mermaids don’t exist. Similarly, a catalogue of beliefs about experience is
not the same as a catalogue of experiences themselves. Philosopher Joseph
Levine (1994, p. 117) has objected that “conscious experiences themselves,
not merely our verbal judgments about them, are the primary data to which
a theory must answer.” This can’t be right. How, in advance of theory, could
we catalogue the experiences themselves? Consider the evidence we get
from putting subjects into experimental situations and querying them (and
asking them to perform whatever other actions we want them to perform).
These sources are naturally nested by the cascade of interpretations we
have to perform, ranked here from least raw to most raw:
         (a) “conscious experiences themselves”
         (b) beliefs about these conscious experiences
         (c) the “verbal judgments” Levine mentions

=== p. 303 ===

          (d) the utterances of one sort or another that (can be interpreted
          to) express those verbal judgments
In one sense of “primary,” the utterances are primary data—recorded
sounds and motions. Electroencephalographic (EEG) readings and
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) readings and the like can be
added to the primary data, as circumstances permit. Reliable methods of
interpretation can take us to (c) and (b), so we have a catalogue of subjects’
beliefs about what it is like to be them under these conditions. But should
we push on to (a) in advance of theory? This is not a good idea, for two
reasons.
          First, if (a) outruns (b)—if you have conscious experiences you
          don’t believe you have, then those extra conscious experiences
          are just as inaccessible to you as to the external observers.
So Levine’s proposed alternative garners no more usable data than
heterophenomenology does.
          Second, if (b) outruns (a)—if you believe you have conscious
          experiences that you don’t in fact have, then it is your beliefs that
          we need to explain, not the nonexistent experiences.
Sticking to the heterophenomenological standard, then, and treating (b) as
the maximal set of primary data, is the way to avoid any commitment to
spurious data, while ensuring that all phenomena accessible to anybody get
included.
   What if some beliefs are inexpressible in verbal judgments? There is
nothing to prevent heterophenomenologists and subjects from collaborating
on devising analogue or other nonlinguistic modes of belief expression. For
instance,
          Draw a vertical line across the line segment indicating how
          intense [in one dimension or another] the experience is:
          Barely noticeable                                Overpowering
Or subjects can press a button with variable pressure to indicate severity of
pain (or anxiety or boredom or even distrust in the experiment). Then there
are a host of physiological dependent variables to measure, from galvanic
skin response and heart rate to changes in facial expression and posture.
And if you, the subject, believe that there are still ineffable residues

=== p. 304 ===

unconveyed after exhausting such methods, you can tell this to the
heterophenomenologists, who can add that belief to the list of beliefs in
your primary data:
            S claims that he has ineffable beliefs about X.
If this belief is true, then science has the obligation to explain what such
beliefs are and why they are ineffable. If this belief is false, science still
has to explain why S believes (falsely) that there are these particular
ineffable beliefs.1

1 The defense of heterophenomenology as the methodology of choice for the scientific study of
consciousness has occasioned substantial controversy. Some researchers regard it as a game-changing clarification of the conditions under which science can study consciousness, some
regard it as just rehearsing the obvious, and still others continue to object. See Sources for
references to some of the best work on this that has appeared to date.

=== p. 305 ===

64. MARY THE COLOR SCIENTIST: A BOOM CRUTCH UNVEILED

Australian philosopher Frank Jackson’s thought experiment about Mary the
color scientist, often called “the Knowledge Argument,” has been pumping
philosophers’ intuitions with remarkable vigor since it first appeared in
1982. For sheer volume and reliability, this must count as one of the most
successful intuition pumps ever devised by an analytical philosopher. It is a
classic, perennially on the list of required reading in undergraduate courses
in the philosophy of mind all over the English-speaking world, and several
weighty anthologies have been devoted to essays reflecting on its
implications. It is interesting to note that its author has subsequently
recanted, declaring that he no longer accepts its conclusion—but that has
not diminished its popularity.
   Here it is in its entirety, drawn slightly out of context perhaps, but still
clear as can be:
          Mary is a brilliant scientist who is, for whatever reason, forced to
          investigate the world from a black and white room via a black
          and white television monitor. She specializes in the
          neurophysiology of vision and acquires, let us suppose, all the
          physical information there is to obtain about what goes on when
          we see ripe tomatoes, or the sky, and use terms like “red”, “blue”,
          and so on. She discovers, for example, just which wavelength
          combinations from the sky stimulate the retina, and exactly how
          this produces via the central nervous system the contraction of
          the vocal chords and expulsion of air from the lungs that results
          in the uttering of the sentence “The sky is blue”. (It can hardly be
          denied that it is in principle possible to obtain all this physical
          information from black and white television, otherwise the Open
          University would of necessity need to use color television.) What
          will happen when Mary is released from her black and white
          room or is given a color television monitor? Will she learn
          anything or not? It seems just obvious that she will learn
          something about the world and our visual experience of it. But
          then it is inescapable that her previous knowledge was
          incomplete. But she had all the physical information. Ergo there

=== p. 306 ===

          is more to have than that, and Physicalism [i.e., materialism, the
          denial of dualism] is false. [Jackson, 1982, p. 130]
   Is it a good intuition pump? Let’s turn all the knobs and see what makes
it work. Actually, that would take us too long, but the job has been done, in
the sizable literature on the topic. Here I will simply illustrate a few knobs
that need to be examined, and leave the result as an exercise for you. (If
you want, you can check your own results against the literature; two recent
anthologies are referenced in Sources. Can you come up with a new twist?)
More than twenty years ago, I conducted a preliminary exploration of the
knobs, and issued a killjoy verdict that has been largely dismissed or
disregarded: “Like a good thought experiment, its point is immediately
evident even to the uninitiated. In fact it is a bad thought experiment, an
intuition pump that actually encourages us to misunderstand its premises!”
(Dennett, 1991a, p. 398). Let’s see if this is so. I claim that it is much more
difficult to imagine the scenario correctly than people suppose, so they
imagine something easier, and draw their conclusions from that mistaken
base.
          First knob: “a black and white room via a black and white
          television monitor.”
Presumably she wears black or white gloves and is forbidden to look at
herself when she bathes, but the idea of cutting off all “external sources” of
color is forlorn in any case. Would we have to rig some device that
prevented her from rubbing her eyes (to create “phosphenes”—try it)? And
couldn’t she have colors in her dreams before actually seeing them? If not,
why not? Do the colors have to “get in via the eyes” before she can “store”
them in her brain? A tangle of bad folk theory of color lies behind this
simple suggestion.
          Second knob: she “acquires, let us suppose, all the physical
          information there is to obtain about what goes on when we see
          ripe tomatoes, or the sky, and use terms like ‘red’, ‘blue’, and so
          on.”
All the physical information there is to obtain? How much is that? Is that
like having all the money in the world? What would that be like? It’s not
easy to imagine, and nothing less than all will serve to make the thought
experiment’s intended point. It must include all the information about all

=== p. 307 ===

the variation in responses in all the brains, including her own, especially
including all the emotional or affective reactions to all the colors under all
conditions. So she will know in exquisite detail which colors calm her,
annoy her, would grow on her with exposure, distract her, repel her, and so
on. Is she forbidden to perform experiments on herself (without cheating,
without smuggling any colored things into her cell)? If you didn’t imagine
all this (and more), you didn’t follow directions. It’s like being asked to
conceive of a chiliagon and imagining a circle instead. Lots of implications
follow from one of these exercises of mental representation that don’t
follow from the other. In this case, for instance, are we supposed to ignore
the fact that if Mary acquired all this information, she would no doubt be in
a state of total mental collapse, burdened with thousands of encyclopedia
articles and diagrams?
   If Jackson had stipulated that Mary had the God-like property of being
“physically omniscient”—not just about color but about every physical fact
at every level from the quark to the galaxy—many if not all readers would
resist, saying that imagining such a feat is just too fantastical to take
seriously. But stipulating that Mary knows merely all the physical facts
about color vision is not substantially less fantastical.
          “Imagine that Mary has a billion heads. . . .”
          “Don’t be silly!”
          “Ok. Make it a million heads. . . .”
          “No problem!” (Really?)
  In an earlier attempt to dramatize this problem of imagination, I
encouraged people to consider a variant ending:
          And so, one day, Mary’s captors decided it was time for her to see
          colors. As a trick, they prepared a bright blue banana to present as
          her first color experience ever. Mary took one look at it and said
          “Hey! You tried to trick me! Bananas are yellow, but this one is
          blue!” Her captors were dumfounded. How did she do it?
          “Simple,” she replied. “You have to remember that I know
          everything—absolutely everything—that could ever be known
          about the physical causes and effects of color vision. So of course
          before you brought the banana in, I had already written down, in
          exquisite detail, exactly what physical impression a yellow object
          or a blue object (or a green object, etc.) would make on my

=== p. 308 ===

          nervous system. So I already knew exactly what thoughts I would
          have (because, after all, the ‘mere disposition’ to think about this
          or that is not one of your famous qualia, is it?). I was not in the
          slightest surprised by my experience of blue (what surprised me
          was that you would try such a second-rate trick on me). I realize
          it is hard for you to imagine that I could know so much about my
          reactive dispositions that the way blue affected me came as no
          surprise. Of course it’s hard for you to imagine. It’s hard for
          anyone to imagine the consequences of someone knowing
          absolutely everything physical about anything!’ ” [Dennett,
          1991a, pp. 399–400]
   It is standardly assumed that things could not proceed this way. As
Jackson disarmingly put it, “It seems just obvious that she will learn
something about the world and our visual experience of it.” Or as George
Graham and Terry Horgan (2000, p. 72) say, “Surely, [ding!], we submit,
she should be both surprised and delighted.” That is a mistake, and that is
what is wrong with Mary as a thought experiment. It just feels so good to
conclude that Mary has a revelation of some sort when she first sees color
that nobody wants to bother showing that this is how the story must go. In
fact, it needn’t go that way at all.
   Jackson’s intuition pump excellently exposes to the light a lot of naïve
thinking about the nature of color experience and the brain that no doubt
serves people well most of the time, so we might grant that he nicely draws
out some of the implications of folk theory. But his aim was to refute a
hypothesis about the capacity of the physical sciences to account for all
color phenomena. Of course in any real-world situation, somebody in
Mary’s imagined position would learn something new because however
much she knew about color, there would be lots of facts about physical
effects of color she didn’t know. It is only the stipulated extreme case that
makes Jackson’s “just obvious” and Graham and Horgan’s “surely” out of
place. If you are still inclined to think that my suggested alternative ending
of the story would have to be impossible, see if you can work out an argued
reason for your belief. It would be interesting to see if you come up with a
consideration that has escaped the hundreds of philosophers who have
labored over this for years. (Of course, that very fact might be taken to
show that this is after all a wonderful intuition pump: it has provided
employment for philosophers for three decades.)

=== p. 309 ===

SUMMARY

A besetting problem for the scientific study of consciousness has been the
fact that everybody is an expert! Not really, of course, but just about
everybody who has reflected for more than a few minutes on the topic
seems to think the deliverances of those reflections are as authoritative as
the results of any high-tech experiment or any mountain of statistics. It can
be downright comical to hear them during the question-and-answer
sessions at scientific conferences firmly correcting the mistakes they have
just detected in the presenter’s work, by citing a recent experience they
(think they) had. If we were, as these people typically think, infallible
judges of the nature of our own personal experiences, they would be right!
   But you can misremember, misinterpret, misdescribe your own most
intimate experiences, covertly driven by some persuasive but unreliable bit
of ideology. Here is a simple demonstration you can perform at home that
may surprise you. Sit in front of a mirror so you can monitor your own
compliance with the directions, which are to stare intently into your own
eyes, fixating on them as a target instead of letting your eyes get attracted
to peripheral goings-on. Now, without looking, take a card from the middle
of a well-shuffled deck of cards and hold it, face-side toward you, at arm’s
length just outside the boundaries of your peripheral vision. Wiggle the
card. You will know you are doing it, but you won’t see it, of course. Start
moving the card into your field of view, wiggling it as you do so. First you
can see motion (the wiggling) but no color! You can’t tell whether it’s a red
card or a black card or a face card, and you certainly can’t identify its
number. As you move it more and more centrally, you will be amazed at
how close to straight ahead it has to be for you to identify its color, or the
fact that it is a face card or not. As the card gets closer and closer to your
fixation point, you must concentrate on not cheating, stealing a glance at
the card as it moves in. When you are finally able to identify the card, it is
almost directly in front of you. Surprising? I don’t know anybody who
wasn’t surprised the first time they experienced this. Here you’ve thought
all along that your vision was roughly equally detailed and colored “all the
way out to the periphery,” and now you learn that although that seems to
“stand to reason,” and seems confirmed by casual introspection, it is
simply not true. This is just one dimension, one phenomenon among many,

=== p. 310 ===

in which the apparently rich, continuous, detailed presentation of the world
in our (visual) consciousness is an illusion. The moral is unmistakable:
don’t think you understand the phenomena of consciousness until you see
what science has discovered about it in recent years. The armchair theories
of philosophers who ignore this moral are negligible at best and more often
deeply confused and confusing. What you “learn” about your consciousness
“through introspection” is a minor but powerfully misleading portion of
what we can learn about your consciousness by adopting the
heterophenomenological framework and studying consciousness
systematically.
   There are still difficulties aplenty in need of resolution, hard problems
that are not the Hard Problem. If when we have solved all these “easy”
problems there is still a deeply mysterious residue, it will then be time to
reconsider our starting point and cast about for some radical departure from
current assumptions about biology, physics, and even logic. In the
meantime, let’s see how far we can get with business-as-usual science, the
science that has brought us our current understanding of everything from
asteroids and plate tectonics to reproduction, growth, repair, and
metabolism in living things.

