=== chunk: dennett-2013-intuition-pumps/part-viii-free-will ===
title: Part VIII — Tools for Thinking about Free Will (Chs. 65–73)
source_pdf: docs/sources/dennett-2013-intuition-pumps/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 311-359
page_scheme: pdf
plan_page_start: 311
plan_page_end: 359
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 311 ===

                                                VIII.
                 TOOLS FOR THINKING ABOUT FREE WILL

The chasm between the manifest image and the scientific image is at its
most treacherous when the topic is free will. Like the questions of what
color is, what it really is, and what dollars are, really, when you get right
down to it the question of whether free will is an illusion or something we
actually have invites us to use the scientific image to investigate this issue,
which is posed in the traditional terms of the manifest image. And the
invitation has been enthusiastically accepted in recent years. There has
been quite a chorus of eminent scientists saying, point blank, that free will
is an illusion: neuroscientists Wolf Singer, Chris Frith, and Patrick
Haggard; psychologists Paul Bloom and Daniel Wegner; and a few rather
well-regarded physicists, Stephen Hawking and Albert Einstein. Could so
many brilliant scientists be wrong? Many—not all, and maybe not most—
philosophers say yes. They say this is a job for philosophy! Are they right?
I think so.
   The scientists have typically been making a rookie mistake: confusing
the manifest image with what we might call the folk ideology of the
manifest image. The folk ideology of color is, let’s face it, bonkers; color
just isn’t what most people think it is, but that doesn’t mean that the
manifest world doesn’t really have any colors; it means that colors—real
colors—are quite different from what most folks think they are. The folk
ideology of consciousness is also bonkers—resolutely dualistic and
mysterian; if that were what consciousness had to be, then Wright would be
right (see p. 313): we’d have to say that consciousness doesn’t exist. But
we don’t have to treat consciousness as “real magic”—the kind that doesn’t
exist, made of wonder tissue; we can recognize the reality of
consciousness as a phenomenon by acknowledging that folks don’t yet have
a sound ideology about it. Similarly, free will isn’t what some of the folk
ideology of the manifest image proclaims it to be, a sort of magical
isolation from causation. I’ve compared free will in this sense to levitation,
and one of the philosophical defenders of this bonkers vision has frankly

=== p. 312 ===

announced that a free choice is a “little miracle.” I wholeheartedly agree
with the scientific chorus that that sort of free will is an illusion, but that
doesn’t mean that free will is an illusion in any morally important sense. It
is as real as colors, as real as dollars.
   Unfortunately, some of the scientists who now declare that science has
shown that free will is an illusion go on to say that this “discovery”
matters, in a morally important sense. They think it has major implications
for morality and the law: nobody is ever really responsible, for instance, so
nobody ever deserves to be either punished or praised. They are making the
mistake people make when they say that nothing is ever solid, not really.
They are using an unreconstructed popular concept of free will, when they
should be adjusting it first, the way they do with color and consciousness
(and space and time and solidity and all the other things that the ideology
of the manifest image gets wrong).
   The intuition pumps in this part are designed to wean you from that
ideology about free will and get you to see a better concept, the concept of
real free will, practical free will, the phenomenon in the manifest image
that matters. The controversies that have swirled around the topic of free
will for several millennia are too many and too tangled to be settled in any
one part or book, but we have to start somewhere, and these are thinking
tools that work rather like crowbars, jimmying you out of well-worn ruts
into rather new terrain with better perspectives. The first is designed to
show why this is such an important task.

=== p. 313 ===

65. A TRULY NEFARIOUS NEUROSURGEON

We are at the dawn of neurosurgical treatment of debilitating psychological
conditions. Deep brain stimulation by implanted electrodes is showing
striking effects in treating obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), for
instance, as reported in a pioneering study by neuropsychiatrist Damiaan
Denys and his colleagues (2010) in Amsterdam. That is fact, but this is
fiction: One day a brilliant neurosurgeon said to a patient on whom she had
just performed an implantation procedure in her shiny high-tech operating
theater:
          The device I’ve implanted doesn’t just control your OCD; it
          controls your every decision, thanks to our master control system,
          which maintains radio contact with your microchip twenty-four
          hours a day. In other words, I’ve disabled your conscious will;
          your sense of free will henceforth will be an illusion.
In fact she had done no such thing; this was simply a lie she decided to tell
her patient to see what would happen. It worked; the poor fellow went out
into the world convinced that he was not a responsible agent, but rather a
mere puppet, and his behavior began to show it: he became irresponsible,
aggressive, and negligent, indulging his worst whims until he got caught
and put on trial. Testifying in his own defense, he passionately protested his
non-responsibility because of the implant in his brain, and the
neuroscientist, when called to testify, admitted what she had said, and
added, “But I was just messing with his head—a practical joke, that’s all. I
never thought he’d believe me!”
   It really doesn’t matter whether the court believed his testimony or hers,
whether it sentenced him or her; either way she ruined his life with her ill-considered assertion, robbing him of his integrity and crippling his power
to make decisions. In fact, her false “debriefing” of her patient actually
accomplished nonsurgically much of what she claimed to accomplish
surgically: she disabled him. But if she is responsible for this dire
consequence, the neuroscientists currently filling the media with talk about
how their science shows that free will is an illusion are risking mass-production of the same harm to all the people who take them at their word.1
Neuroscientists, psychologists, and philosophers need to take seriously

=== p. 314 ===

their moral obligation to think through the presuppositions and
implications of their public pronouncements on these issues with the same
care that is demanded of people who hold forth on global warming or
impending asteroid strikes. For just one example, consider the message that
wily social critic and observer Tom Wolfe (2000 p. 100) finds in the
pronouncements of these neuroscientists:
            The conclusion people out beyond the laboratory walls are
            drawing is:
              The fix is in! We’re all hardwired! That, and: Don’t blame me!
            I’m wired wrong!
Wired wrong? What would it be, then, to be wired right—or have scientists
“discovered” that nobody is, or could be, wired right for moral
responsibility?

1 If you doubt that instilling such a belief could have such consequences, see Vohs and Schooler
(2008) and the subsequent literature for experimental evidence.

=== p. 315 ===

66. A DETERMINISTIC TOY: CONWAY’S GAME OF LIFE

When physicist Richard Feynman found himself listening to a scientific
talk in a field he didn’t know well, he had a favorite question to ask the
speaker: Can you give me a really simple example of what you’re talking
about? If the speaker couldn’t oblige, Feynman got suspicious, and rightly
so. Did this person really have something to say, or was this just fancy
technical talk parading as scientific wisdom? If you can’t make a hard
problem relatively simple, you are probably not going about it the right
way. Simplification is not just for beginners.
   Biology has its “model organisms”—species that have been carefully
chosen to ease the path of the experimenter; they reproduce swiftly in the
lab, are relatively safe and easy to handle, and—once they have been
studied by many teams—are well mapped and understood: the fruit fly, the
laboratory rat, the zebra fish, the squid (for its giant nerve axon), the
nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans, and Arabidopsis thaliana, a hardy,
fast-growing plant related to mustard, the first plant to have its entire
genome sequenced. Artificial intelligence (AI) has its own simple cases,
known as “toy problems,” which, as the name suggests, are deliberately
oversimplified versions of “serious” real-world problems. Many of the
most interesting programs devised in AI are solutions to toy problems—
such as getting a computer program to build simple structures in the blocks
world, a virtual world consisting of a tabletop with a bunch of movable
children’s blocks on it. Playing chess is a toy problem; it is certainly much
more tractable than driving a car from Maine to California, or solving the
Arab–Israeli conflict, or even making a sandwich of appropriate ingredients
found in a kitchen. Ethicists have their trolley problems: In the simplest
version, a runaway trolley is heading down a track where if it is not
diverted it will hit and kill five people who cannot get off the track; there is
a switch that you can throw that will divert the trolley to a side track—
where it will hit and kill a single person. Do you throw the switch?
   Here is a toy world for helping people think about determinism, the idea
that the facts at one moment in time—the location, mass, direction, and
velocity of every particle—determine what happens in the next moment,

=== p. 316 ===

and so on, forever. Physicists and philosophers and others have argued for
several millennia about whether our universe is deterministic, or whether
there are some genuinely undetermined events: utterly unpredictable
“random” events that just happen without anything causing them to happen.
Even experienced thinkers may find new insights by playing around with
Life, the breathtakingly simple model of a deterministic world created by
the mathematician John Horton Conway and his graduate students in 1970.
   Life is played on a two-dimensional grid, such as a checkerboard, using
simple counters, such as pebbles or pennies—or one could also go high-tech and play it on a computer screen. It is not a game one plays to win; if
it is a game at all, it is solitaire. The grid divides the plane into square
cells, and each cell is either ON or OFF at each moment. (If it is ON, place
a penny on the square; if it is OFF, leave the square empty.) Notice that
each cell has eight neighbors: the four adjacent cells—north, south, east,
and west—and the four diagonals—northeast, southeast, southwest, and
northwest.

Time in the Life world is discrete, not continuous; it advances in ticks, and
the state of the world changes between each tick according to the following
rule:
         Life Physics: For each cell in the grid, count how many of its
         eight neighbors are ON at the present instant. If the answer is
         exactly two, the cell stays in its present state (ON or OFF) in the
         next instant. If the answer is exactly three, the cell is ON in the

=== p. 317 ===

          next instant whatever its current state. Under all other conditions
          the cell is OFF.
   That’s the only rule of the game. You now know all there is to know
about how to play Life. The entire physics of the Life world is captured in
that single, unexceptioned law. While this is the fundamental law of the
“physics” of the Life world, it helps at first to conceive this curious physics
in biological terms: think of cells going ON as births, cells going OFF as
deaths, and succeeding instants as generations. Either overcrowding (more
than three inhabited neighbors) or isolation (less than two inhabited
neighbors) leads to death. Consider a few simple cases.

In the configuration in figure 2, only cells D and F have exactly three
neighbors ON, so they will be the only birth cells in the next generation.
Cells B and H each have only one neighbor ON, so they die in the next
generation. Cell E has two neighbors ON, so it stays on. So the next
“instant” will look like figure 3.

=== p. 318 ===

   Obviously, the configuration will revert back in the next instant, and this
little pattern will flip-flop back and forth indefinitely, unless some new ON
cells are brought onto the scene somehow. It is called a flasher or traffic
light. What will happen to the configuration in figure 4?

   Nothing. Each ON cell has three neighbors ON, so it is reborn just as it
is. No OFF cell has three neighbors ON, so no other births happen. This
configuration is called a still life.
  By the scrupulous application of our single law, one can predict with
perfect accuracy the next instant of any configuration of ON and OFF cells,
and the instant after that, and so forth. In other words, the Life world is a

=== p. 319 ===

toy world that perfectly instantiates the determinism made famous by the
early-nineteenth-century French scientist Pierre Laplace: given the state
description of this world at an instant, we observers can perfectly predict
the future instants by the simple application of our one law of physics. Or
we could put it this way: when we adopt the physical stance toward a
configuration in the Life world, our powers of prediction are perfect: there
is no noise, no uncertainty, no probability less than one. Moreover, it
follows from the two-dimensionality of the Life world that nothing is
hidden from view. There is no backstage; there are no hidden variables; the
unfolding of the physics of objects in the Life world is directly and
completely visible.
   If you find following the simple rule a tedious exercise, there are
computer simulations of the Life world in which you can set up
configurations on the screen and let the computer execute the algorithm for
you, changing the configuration again and again according to the single
rule. In the best simulations, the scale of both time and space can be
changed, alternating between close-up and bird’s-eye views.
   One soon discovers that some simple configurations are more interesting
than others. Consider a diagonal line segment, such as the one shown in

  This pattern is not a flasher; each generation, the two ON cells at either
end of the row die of isolation and there are no birth cells. The whole
segment soon evaporates. In addition to the configurations that never

=== p. 320 ===

change—the still lifes—and those that evaporate entirely, such as the
diagonal line segment, there are configurations with all kinds of
periodicity. The flasher, we saw, has a two-generation period that continues
ad infinitum, unless some other configuration encroaches. Encroachment is
what makes Life interesting: among the periodic configurations are some
that swim, amoeba-like, across the plane. The simplest is the glider, the
five-pixel configuration shown taking a single stroke to the southeast in

   Then there are the eaters, the puffer trains and space rakes, and a host of
other aptly named denizens of the Life world that emerge as recognizable
objects at a new level (analogous to the design level). This level has its own
language, a transparent foreshortening of the tedious descriptions one could
give at the physical level. For instance:
          An eater can eat a glider in four generations. Whatever is being
          consumed, the basic process is the same. A bridge forms between
          the eater and its prey. In the next generation, the bridge region
          dies from overpopulation, taking a bite out of both eater and prey.
          The eater then repairs itself. The prey usually cannot. If the
          remainder of the prey dies out as with the glider, the prey is
          consumed. [Poundstone, 1985, p. 38]

=== p. 321 ===

   Notice that something curious happens to our “ontology”—our catalogue
of what exists—as we move between levels. At the physical level there is
no motion, only ON and OFF, and the only individual things that exist,
cells, are defined by their fixed spatial location. At the design level we
suddenly have the motion of persisting objects; it is one and the same
glider (though each generation is composed of different cells) that has
moved southeast in figure 5, changing shape as it moves; and there is one
less glider in the world after the eater has eaten it in figure 7.
   Notice too that whereas at the physical level, there are absolutely no
exceptions to the general law, at this level our generalizations have to be
hedged: they require “usually” or “provided nothing encroaches” clauses.
Stray bits of debris from earlier events can “break” or “kill” one of the
objects in the ontology at this level. Their salience as real things is
considerable, but not guaranteed. To say that their salience is considerable
is to say that one can, with some small risk, ascend to this design level,
adopt its ontology, and proceed to predict—sketchily and riskily—the
behavior of larger configurations or systems of configurations, without
bothering to compute the physical level. For instance, one can set oneself
the task of designing some interesting super-system out of the “parts” that
the design level makes available.
   This is just what Conway and his students set out to do, and they
succeeded majestically. They designed, and proved the viability of the
design of, a self-reproducing entity composed entirely of Life cells.
Grinding away deterministically on its infinite plane, it would copy itself
perfectly, and then its copy would copy itself, and so forth. It was also (for
good measure) a Universal Turing machine: a two-dimensional computer
that in principle can compute any computable function! What on earth
inspired Conway and his students to create first this world and then this
amazing denizen of that world? They were trying to answer at a very
abstract level one of the central questions of biology: What is the minimal
complexity required for a self-reproducing thing? They were following up
the brilliant early speculations of John von Neumann, who had been
working on the question at the time of his death in 1957. Francis Crick and
James Watson had discovered the structure of DNA in 1953, but how it
worked was a mystery for many years. Von Neumann had imagined in some
detail a sort of floating robot that picked up pieces of flotsam and jetsam
that could be used to build a duplicate of itself, and that would then be able

=== p. 322 ===

to repeat the process. His description (posthumously published, 1966) of
how an automaton would read its own blueprint and then copy it into its
new creation anticipated in impressive detail many of the later discoveries
about the mechanisms of DNA expression and replication, but in order to
make his proof of the possibility of a self-reproducing automaton
mathematically rigorous and tractable, von Neumann had switched to
simple, two-dimensional abstractions, now known as cellular automata.
Conway’s Life world cells are a particularly agreeable example of cellular
automata.
   Conway and his students wanted to confirm von Neumann’s proof in
detail by actually creating a two-dimensional world with a simple physics
in which such a self-replicating construction would be a stable, working
structure. Like von Neumann, they wanted their answer to be as general as
possible, and hence as independent as possible of actual (earthly? local?)
physics and chemistry. They wanted something dead simple, easy to
visualize and easy to calculate, so they not only dropped from three
dimensions to two but also “digitized” both space and time: all times and
distances, as we saw, are in whole numbers of “instants” and “cells.” It was
von Neumann who had taken Alan Turing’s abstract conception of a
mechanical computer (now called a Turing machine) and engineered it into
the specification for a general-purpose stored-program serial-processing
computer (now called a von Neumann machine), and in his brilliant
explorations of the spatial and structural requirements for such a computer,
he had realized—and proved—that a Universal Turing machine (see part
IV) could in principle be “built” in a two-dimensional world.1 Conway and
his students also set out to confirm this with their own exercise in two-dimensional engineering.2
   It was far from easy, but they showed how they could “build” a working
computer out of simpler Life forms. Glider streams can provide the input-output “tape,” for instance, and the tape-reader can be some huge assembly
of eaters, gliders, and other bits and pieces. What does this machine look
like? Poundstone (1985) calculated that the whole construction would be on
the order of 1013 cells or pixels.
         Displaying a 1013-pixel pattern would require a video screen
         about 3 million pixels across at least. . . . [Imagine a screen with
         the high resolution of your laptop or iPad, a half a mile wide.]
         Perspective would shrink the pixels of a self-reproducing pattern

=== p. 323 ===

          to invisibility. If you got far enough away from the screen so that
          the entire pattern was comfortably in view, the pixels (and even
          the gliders, eaters and guns) would be too tiny to make out. A
          self-reproducing pattern would be a hazy glow, like a galaxy. [pp.
          227–288]

   In other words, by the time you have built up enough pieces into
something that can reproduce itself (in a two-dimensional world), it is
roughly as much larger than its smallest bits as an organism is larger than
its atoms. You probably can’t do it with anything much less complicated,
though this has not been strictly proved.
   The game of Life illustrates many important principles and can be used
to construct many different arguments or thought experiments, but I will
use it to illustrate just three points, leaving you to discover others for
yourself: First, notice how the distinction between the physical stance and
the design stance gets blurred here. Do gliders, for instance, count as
designed things, or as natural objects—like atoms and molecules? The
tape-reader that Conway and his students cobbled out of gliders and eaters
and the like must count as designed if anything does, but its ingredients are
quite raw materials—the simplest “things” in the Life world. Nobody had
to design or invent the glider; it was discovered to be implied by the
physics of the Life world. But that, of course, is actually true of everything
in the Life world. Nothing happens in the Life world that isn’t strictly
implied—logically deducible by straightforward theorem-proving—by the
physics and the initial configuration of cells. Some of the things in the Life
world are just more marvelous and unanticipated (by us, with our puny
intellects) than others. There is a sense in which the Conway self-reproducing computer pixel-galaxy is “just” one more Life macromolecule
with a very long and complicated periodicity in its behavior. This nicely
illustrates a parallel point about biology and the origin of life: amino acids,
one might say, just are; they didn’t have to be designed. But proteins,
composed of nothing but amino acids, are too fancy; they are at least sorta
designed. Darwin’s gradualism makes yet another appearance.
   Second, the Life world, being deterministic, has a perfectly predictable
future for every possible configuration, but, somewhat surprisingly, its past
is often perfectly inscrutable! Consider the still life consisting of four ON
pixels in a square. You can’t tell from looking at it, or even looking at it

=== p. 324 ===

and its neighborhood, what its past was. To see this, note that any three of
the four pixels ON would lead, in the next generation, to this still life of
four pixels ON. Whether any of those cells were OFF in the past is an inert
historical fact.
   Third, recall how important “noise” and collisions were in creating the
mutations that evolution—like other creative processes—feeds on.
Conway’s huge construction reproduced itself, but it couldn’t mutate. It
would always make a perfect copy of itself, and in order to introduce
mutations into the picture, the whole construction would have to be
enlarged many fold. Why? Because the Life world is deterministic, so the
only way a “random” mutation can occur is if some stray bit of stuff
wanders (pseudo-randomly) onto the scene and breaks something. But the
smallest moving thing is a glider, so think of it as like a single photon, or
cosmic ray, moving at the speed of (Life physics) light. A single glider can
do a lot of damage; if it must barely “tweak” something in the genome of
the self-reproducing thing without destroying the genome, that genome is
going to have to be very large, relative to the glider, and quite robust. It
might well be provable that evolution could not occur in the Life world, no
matter how large we made the entities, if it turned out that these galaxy-sized assemblages were just too fragile to survive an occasional rain of
gliders.

1 See Dennett, 1987, chapter 9, for more on the theoretical implications of this trade-off in space
and time.
2 For a completely different perspective on two-dimensional physics and engineering, see A. K.
Dewdney’s Planiverse (1984), a vast improvement over Edwin A. Abbott’s Flatland (1884), and a
magnificent thinking tool in its own right.

=== p. 325 ===

67. ROCK, PAPER, AND SCISSORS

Probably every one of you knows the game of rock, paper, and scissors.
Two people face each other, and count, “One, two, three, shoot!” and each,
simultaneously, extends a hand either clenched in a fist (rock), with a pair
of fingers extended (scissors), or with the palm flat open facing down
(paper). Rock breaks (beats) scissors, scissors cut (beat) paper, and paper
covers (beats) rock. Unless both players display the same hand symbol—a
tie—one player wins and the other loses. It’s a tantalizing game because if
you can outguess your opponent, you can seem to read her mind and come
up with the right hand shape to win consistently. It’s unnerving when that
happens. Can some people play the game better than others? Apparently,
since there have been tournaments with large cash prizes in which national
and international winners have emerged, and—this is important since every
tournament has to be won by somebody even if there is no skill involved—
the better players have a history of winning.
   How do they do it? Perhaps by picking up subtle hints from the faces and
postures of their opponents. Poker players speak of reading the “tell” of
another player, sensing when they are bluffing and when they aren’t, while
maintaining a “poker face” of their own. Perhaps most people who play
rock, paper, and scissors have a tell that they can’t control and that the best
players pick up at the last instant. So what is the best strategy to use to
prevent your opponent from picking up a pattern from your outer
demeanor? Playing absolutely randomly is the best, since if you play a
random sequence of moves, there is simply no pattern for your opponent to
detect. (While you are playing randomly, and breaking even, you can try to
find a pattern in your opponent’s moves, and use that pattern to craft a
nonrandom strategy, and then strike.)
   People are notoriously bad at creating actually random series. They tend
to switch too often, avoiding choosing the same move two or three times in
a row, for instance (which ought to occur fairly often in a genuinely random
series). Knowing that your casual effort to create a genuinely patternless
series is apt to fail, you should consider a better strategy: get a table of
random numbers from the library (or online). Put your finger “at random”

=== p. 326 ===

somewhere on the table, and copy down the next hundred digits. Throw out
all the 0s (say), and then replace each 1, 2, or 3 with “R” (for rock), each 4,
5, and 6, with “P” (for paper), and each 7, 8, and 9 with “S” (for scissors).
This will give you a sequence of approximately ninety moves (since you
threw out approximately ten 0s), which should be enough for a match.
   Now you’re ready to play, and the cardinal rule is: keep your list secret.
If your opponent gets to peek at it, you will be completely at her mercy. As
the saying goes, she will turn you into a money pump. If she has no way of
getting at your list, on the other hand, she will have to start trying to
second-guess you, anticipating your line of thinking as best she can. (In
short, she will have to treat you from the intentional stance and reason
about your reasoning, instead of treating you as a simple mechanism whose
behavior she can reliably read off your list.)
   This simple principle of keeping your intended choices secret from your
opponent turns out to be one of the central pivots in the long-standing
controversies over free will. In fact, the invention of game theory by von
Neumann and Morgenstern (1944) began with the recognition that while a
solitary agent (or intentional system) trying to predict the future from the
information it gathers can get by with a calculation of expected utility using
probability theory (of one sort or another), as soon as there are two agents,
two intentional systems in the environment, the circumstance is changed
radically. Now each agent has to take into account the attempts at
prediction by the other agent, and include the other agent’s observation of,
and attempts to anticipate and exploit, its own behavior, creating feedback
loops of indefinite complexity.1
   This fundamental fog of inscrutability or unpredictability of agents by
each other creates the conditions in which game theory flourishes.
Evolution has discovered this, and many species can be seen to apply the
principles of game theory (competence without comprehension!) in their
interactions. Gazelle stotting is just one simple example. Another is the
erratic flight of butterflies, whose trajectories are hard for insectivorous
birds to predict, though evolution has helped the birds by giving them a
faster “flicker fusion rate” than we have, for instance (they see more
“frames per second” than we do—a movie would look like a slide show to
them).
   Be unpredictable, and look out for others following this advice!
“Appreciation” of this principle can be seen in the widespread instinct

=== p. 327 ===

found in animals who, when confronted with any complicated moving
entity, try to treat it as an agent—“Who goes there, and what do you want?”
not just “What’s that?”—in order to be safe, because maybe it is an agent
and it wants to eat the animal, or to mate with it, or to fight over some
prize. This instinctual response is the source in evolution of the invention
of all the invisible elves, goblins, leprechauns, fairies, ogres, and gods that
eventually evolve into God, the ultimate invisible intentional system
(Dennett, 2006a).
   Like animals who adopt this strategy without having to know why, we
human beings appreciate the tactic of preserving our unpredictability
without having to understand why this is such a good idea. But it’s pretty
obvious, most of the time. When you are shopping and spot an antique that
you have to have, you know better than to gush over it before you’ve
learned the selling price. You’ll get scalped by the seller if you don’t. When
you advertise something for sale, you put a reasonable asking price on it—
one you would be content to receive—because you can’t tell when a buyer
would actually pay more, and you hope that the buyer can’t tell how much
less you would accept than your asking price. (You can refuse to bargain, of
course.) Auctions are ways of exploring this terra incognita, and if you trust
the auctioneer with an advance bid, you are counting on his integrity not to
reveal your maximum to the other bidders.
   Similarly, when you fall head over heels in love at first sight of
somebody, you do your best not to swoon and pant, keeping as reserved and
casual as possible; you don’t want to scare this paragon off or,
alternatively, let this delight have too much of the upper hand, wrapping
you around her little finger. A poker face is not just for poker. In general,
you improve your chances of getting what you want by keeping the
competition—the other agents in the neighborhood—off balance, so they
don’t have good enough hunches about which way you’re going to leap to
prepare for your landing. (It’s costly to prepare another agent’s
environment, so your opponents won’t try to anticipate you unless they
have very good evidence of what you will do.)
   Magicians know how to do a “psychological force” to get you to pick
from the deck (“of your own free will”) the card they want you to take.
There are many methods, all subtle and hard to detect, and a really good
magician can do it most of the time. This is a genuine abridgement of your

=== p. 328 ===

agency, a manipulation that turns you into a tool, a pawn, an extension of
the magician’s will, not a free agent.
   Contrary to ancient ideology, we don’t want our free choices to be utterly
uncaused. What we all want, and should want, is that when we act, we act
based on good information about the best options available to us. If only
the environment will cause us to have lots of relevant true beliefs about
what’s out there, and also cause us to act on the most judicious assessment
of that evidence we could achieve! That would give us almost everything
we want as agents—except this: we wouldn’t want the environment to
include a manipulative agent that usurps control from us, so we wouldn’t
want the environment to make our best moves too obvious to all the other
agents out there, for then they can exploit us, knowing too much about what
we want and how much we want it. So add to our wish list the capacity to
keep our thought processes and our decisions to ourselves, even if it means
on occasion choosing our second-best option, just to keep the others off
balance. (Clegg, 2012, provides a pioneering formal analysis of this.)
   Some people, dimly appreciating the importance of this unpredictability,
think that “just to be safe” they should hold out for absolute
unpredictability, which can be achieved only if, down in the basement of
our brains, matters are physically indeterministic. Here is how the
philosopher Jerry Fodor (2003) once put it with characteristic vividness:
         One wants to be what tradition has it that Eve was when she bit
         the apple. Perfectly free to do otherwise. So perfectly free, in
         fact, that even God couldn’t tell which way she’d jump. [p. 18]
   But why does “one want” this? Is this absolute unpredictability any
better, really, than practical unpredictability? Many philosophers, over
several thousand years, have insisted on absolute unpredictability as a
condition of genuine free will. Do they know something that we don’t
know? If so, they are keeping it secret. To almost all of them, the idea that
free will is incompatible with determinism has seemed too obvious to need
an argument. I say that the burden of proof is on them. Show us why we
ought to despair if we can’t have absolute unpredictability. I’ve shown why
we—like evolution itself—are wise to arrange for as much practical
unpredictability as we can. Tell us, please, why that is not enough.
   I will give you one good reason: if you plan to play rock, paper, and
scissors with God, for high stakes (salvation, maybe), then you have reason,
just as Fodor says, to want “perfect” freedom. I, for one, don’t anticipate

=== p. 329 ===

that contest, so I am content with the practical freedom I have by just
keeping my counsel and staying away from sleight-of-hand artists and
other manipulators when the stakes are high.

1 A delicious example of runaway higher-order second-guessing appears in the film The Princess
Bride, in the scene in which Wallace Shawn as Vizzini tries to outwit Cary Elwes as Westley in the
“Which cup has the poison?” encounter, and ends up outwitting himself. See http://www
.dailymotion.com/video/xhr71a_never-go-in-against-a-sicilian-when-death-is-on-theline_shortfilms.

=== p. 330 ===

68. TWO LOTTERIES

Compare the following two lotteries for fairness. In Lottery A—for
“After”—all the tickets are sold, their stubs are placed in a suitable mixer
and mixed, as randomly as you like, and then the winning ticket is blindly
drawn. (Most lotteries we encounter are like this.) In Lottery B—for
“Before”—the mixing of stubs and the blind drawing of the winner take
place before the tickets are sold (and the winning stub is put in a safe), but
otherwise the lotteries are conducted the same way. Someone might think
the second lottery is unfair because the winning ticket is determined before
people even buy their tickets. One of those tickets is already the winner
(even if nobody knows which one); the other tickets are worthless paper,
and selling them to unsuspecting people is some sort of fraud. But in fact
both lotteries are equally fair. Everyone who buys a ticket has an equal
chance of winning; the timing of the selection of the winner is an utterly
inessential feature.
   The drawing in most lotteries is postponed until after the sale of the
tickets in order to provide the public with firsthand eyewitness evidence
that there have been no shenanigans. No sneaky person with inside
knowledge has manipulated the distribution of tickets, because the
knowledge of the winning ticket did not (and could not) exist in any agent
until after the tickets were sold. It is interesting that not all lotteries follow
this practice. Publisher’s Clearing House used to mail out millions of
envelopes each year that had written on them in bold letters “YOU MAY
ALREADY HAVE WON”—a million dollars, or some other prize. (The
organization now runs its lottery largely online.) These expensive
campaigns are based on market research showing that in general people do
think lotteries with preselected winners are fair so long as they are honestly
conducted. But perhaps people go along with these lotteries
uncomplainingly because they get their tickets for free. Would many people
buy a ticket in a lottery in which the winning stub, sealed in a special
envelope, was known to have been deposited in a bank vault from the
outset? People buy scratch tickets by the millions, and whether or not any
ticket is a winner is already determined when it is bought. Apparently these

=== p. 331 ===

people consider themselves to have a real opportunity to win. I think they
are right, but whether they are right or wrong, their calm conviction that
such lotteries are fair, and that they have a real opportunity to win, should
undo the confidence of the philosophers (going back two millennia to
Democritus and Lucretius) who have somehow convinced themselves that
no opportunity is a real opportunity unless the outcome is undetermined up
to the last instant. These philosophers have maintained that without a
continuing supply of truly random, undetermined branch points to break up
the fabric of causation, there is no possibility of free choices, no real
chances to do the right thing.
   The two lotteries give us a new perspective on the problem of
determinism. If the world is determined, then we have pseudo-random
number generators in us, not truly (quantum-mechanical) random
randomizers. If our world is determined, all our lottery tickets were drawn
at once, in effect, about fourteen billion years ago at the moment of the Big
Bang, put in an envelope for us, and doled out as we needed them through
life. Whenever you need to “flip a coin” or in some less ostentatious way
make a chancy decision, your brain opens the envelope and takes out the
next “random” number, letting its value determine what you do, just like
the list of moves in “rock, paper, and scissors.” “But that is unfair,”
someone may say, “for some people will have been dealt more winners than
others.” Indeed, on any particular deal, some people have more high cards
than others, but one should remember that in the long run the luck averages
out. “But if all the drawings take place before we are born, some people are
determined to get more luck than others!” That will be true, however, even
if the drawings are not held before we are born, but periodically, on
demand, throughout our lives. Even in a perfectly random and unbiased
drawing, a genuinely undetermined drawing, it is still determined that some
people will get more winners than others. Even in a perfectly fair, perfectly
random, coin-tossing tournament, it is determined that someone—or other
—will win, and everybody else in the tournament will lose. The winner
cannot properly claim it was his “destiny” to win, but whatever advantages
accrue to winning are his, destiny or not, and what could be fairer than
that? Fairness does not consist in everybody winning.
   Probably the most frequently cited reason for hoping for indeterminism
is that without it, when we choose an act, “we could not have done
otherwise,” and surely (ding!) that is something that should be important to

=== p. 332 ===

us. This, too, is not as obvious as it has often seemed, and in order to get a
glimpse at how this familiar idea might be misleading us, consider the
curious category of inert historical facts.

=== p. 333 ===

69. INERT HISTORICAL FACTS

An inert historical fact is any fact about a perfectly ordinary arrangement
of matter in the world at some point in the past that is no longer
discernible, a fact that has left no footprints at all in the world today. My
favorite example of an inert historical fact is this:
          A. Some of the gold in my teeth once belonged to Julius Caesar.
Or maybe this:
          B. It is false that some of the gold in my teeth once belonged to
          Julius Caesar.
Now (logic tells us) one of these two must be a fact. (Hang on: Wasn’t the
moral of the sorta operator chapter that we should distrust these “obvious”
disjunctions? Let’s check this one out. How could it be the case that neither
A nor B had a clear claim on truth? Well, what if ownership in Caesar’s day
was either vague or ill defined so that Caesar only sorta owned some of his
gold—perhaps the way the Queen of England to this day is the owner of all
the swans in the land?1) Assuming that the relevant concept of ownership is
nicely demarcated, the way the concept of gold is, one of the two sentences
must express a fact, but which of the two is true is almost certainly not
discoverable by any physical investigation, no matter how sophisticated it
is and no matter how long it takes to conduct it.
   Really? We can imagine cases where we could be almost certain that
either A or B is the true alternative. If it turned out that, because of various
well-recorded historical processes, the “provenance” of some of the gold in
my teeth was scrupulously controlled and recorded through the millennia
(like the “chain of custody” for exhibits of evidence in murder trials), we
could be quite sure that A is true. Let’s say that my dentist purchased an
ancient gold ring from a museum, the famous “Caesar’s pinky ring,” which
a host of documents attest had been handed down over the centuries from
monarch to monarch until it arrived in the museum, and there is a
videotape showing the dentist melting the ring and pouring the molten gold
into the plaster cast for my filling. Outlandish, sure, but clearly within the

=== p. 334 ===

bounds of physical possibility. Or alternatively, suppose that I am a gold-panning hobbyist and made a trip to the base of a receding glacier in Alaska
that had covered the land for ten thousand years, where I carefully collected
all the gold that subsequently went into my teeth. Then B would be even
more certainly the truth. But if nothing like these extreme tales is well
evidenced, then it is as good as certain that we could never know which of
A or B is true. The true one, whichever it is, is an inert historical fact.
   Quantum physics raises an interesting difficulty: even if the trajectory of
each atom of gold in my teeth could be traced back through the centuries, if
there were occasions when two or more gold atoms—one from the Caesar
legacy and one from outside sources—collided (or just got very close to
each other), it would be impossible in principle to tell which atom was
which after the “collision.” Atoms and smaller particles don’t have
anything like fingerprints or other distinguishing characteristics, and
cannot be continuously tracked, so the continuing identity of particles does
not always make sense, adding another barrier to knowing the facts about
the gold.
   Now whether or not the whole universe is deterministic, computers are
designed to be deterministic in the face of submicroscopic noise and even
quantum randomness, absorbing these fluctuations by being digital, not
analog. (We saw a vivid example of that with Conway’s game of Life in
chapter 66, but digital determinism is everywhere.) The fundamental idea
behind digitizing in order to produce determinism is that we can create
inert historical facts by design. Forcibly sorting all the pivotal events into
two categories—high vs. low; ON vs. OFF; 0 vs. 1—guarantees that the
micro-differences (between different high voltages, different flavors of
being ON, different shades of 0) are ruthlessly discarded. Nothing is
allowed to hinge on them, and they vanish without a trace, facts about
actual historical variations that make no difference at all to the subsequent
series of states through which the computer passes. For instance, your
friend downloads a song from a website and burns it onto two CDs. These
two unlabeled CDs—we’ll call them A and B, but we won’t write their
names on them—will be digital duplicates, of course. Ask him to “copy”
one of them onto your laptop in a pitch-black room. Don’t tell him which
CD to use, and have him handle both CDs after completing the action
(wiping out the possibility of using fingerprint evidence, or DNA traces)

=== p. 335 ===

before depositing them in a bag full of other CDs and shaking it vigorously.
Now we have two candidate inert historical facts:
          (a) Your laptop has a copy made from the A disc.
          (b) Your laptop has a copy made from the B disc.
   Any actual physical encoding of the bit stream of the song will have a
microscopically fine structure that differs from the fine structure of any
other encoding. And when you “copy” one of the CDs to RAM (randomaccess memory), the voltage patterns in RAM will also have a unique fine
structure, and if we then “copy” the file from RAM to a hard disk or a flash
drive, these too will contain microscopic differences that distinguish them.
What is conveniently called copying is always the creation of yet another
continuous or analog physical signal that has its own unique fine structure
because that’s the way the world is way down among the electrons and
protons. But the genius of digitization is that all this fine structure is
“ignored,” wiped out in the “correction to the norm.” When you have
norms, like an alphabet, it doesn’t make any difference wHat fLAvOr the
individual symbols have; they all read the same. In a computer it’s all 0s
and 1s.
   So unless one of the CDs happens to have an “error” discernible at the
level of the digital idealization (has a flipped bit, that is—a 0 instead of a 1,
or vice versa), there will be no way of telling. The digitization prevents the
propagation of the individuality of the two CDs to later versions, and
ultimately to the digital-to-analog conversion that drives the speakers or
ear buds. Some music lovers are reputed to be “golden eared,” able to tell
vinyl records from the best digital CDs, and compressed (e.g., MPEG) from
uncompressed digital files, but no music lover could do better than chance
if asked whether two successive playings of some music were from the
same, or different, CDs. That is an inert historical fact, undetectable not
just by human ears but by electron microscopy of the fine structure of their
“copies” in RAM. Any human being who could do this would be a strong
candidate for having supernatural ESP, since digitization creates a physical
barrier to the information transmission that would enable a guesser to do
better than chance.
   Because a computer is a digital device, it is trivial to get it to execute a
few trillion steps, and then place it back in exactly the same (digital) state
it was in before, and watch it execute exactly the same few trillion (digital)
steps again, and again, and again.

=== p. 336 ===

         Wait a minute, comes an objection: You say computers are
         deterministic? You can get them to replay exactly the same
         trillion steps over and over? Gimme a break! Then why does my
         laptop crash every so often? Why does my word processor freeze
         on Tuesday when I was doing the very same thing that worked
         just fine on Monday?
You weren’t doing the very same thing. It froze not because it is
indeterministic, but because it was not in exactly the same state on Tuesday
that it was in on Monday. Your laptop must have done something in the
interval that raised a hidden “flag” or called up some part of the word
processor that had never before been activated by you, which flipped a bit
somewhere that got saved in its new position when you shut down, and now
the word processor has stubbed its toe on that tiny change and crashed. And
if you somehow manage to put it back in exactly the same Tuesday-morning state a second time, it will crash again.
         What about the “random-number generator”? I thought my
         computer had a built-in device for creating randomness on
         demand.
   Every computer these days comes equipped with a built-in “random
number” generator that can be consulted whenever needed by any program
running on it. (Before there were computers you could buy a book that was
nothing but a table of random numbers to use in your research, page after
page of digits that had been scrupulously generated in such a way as to pass
all the tests of randomness that mathematicians had devised. Of course
each copy of a particular edition of such a book had exactly the same
sequence of random numbers in it. RAND Corporation published one of the
best books in 1955; it consisted of a million random digits.) The sequence
of numbers generated by a so-called random-number generator isn’t really
random, but just pseudo-random: it is “mathematically compressible” in
the sense that this infinitely long sequence can be captured in a finitely
specified mechanism that will crank it out. Suppose, for instance, your
random-number generator is a program that can be specified in, say, a
megabyte—eight million bits—but it generates a sequence (the same
sequence every time) that is actually infinite. If you wanted to send
somebody this infinite series, you wouldn’t have to do so in an infinitely
long e-mail message recording the series verbatim. You could just send

=== p. 337 ===

them your megabyte-long algorithm and they’d have access to the entire
infinite series. That is the fundamental idea of a pseudo-random-number
generator. Whenever you start the random-number generator from a cold
start—whenever you reboot your computer, for instance—it will always
yield exactly the same sequence of digits, but a sequence that is as
apparently patternless as if it were generated by genuinely random
quantum fluctuations. It is a built-in “table of random numbers,” you might
say, rather like what you would get on a very long loop of videotape,
recording the history of a fair roulette wheel over millions of spins. The
loop always returns to “the beginning” when you start up your computer.
Sometimes this matters. Computer programs that avail themselves of
randomness at various “choice” points will nevertheless spin out exactly
the same sequence of states if run over and over again from a cold start,
and sometimes, if you want to test a program for bugs, you will always test
the same “random sample” of states, unless you take steps (easy enough) to
jog the program to dip elsewhere, now and then, into the stream of digits
for its next “random” number.

1 According to the official royal website, “Today, the Crown retains the right to ownership of all
unmarked mute swans in open water, but The Queen only exercises her ownership on certain
stretches of the Thames and its surrounding tributaries. This ownership is shared with the
Worshipful Company of Vintners and the Worshipful Company of Dyers, who were granted rights
of ownership by the Crown in the fifteenth century. Nowadays, of course, the swans are no longer
eaten.”

=== p. 338 ===

70. A COMPUTER CHESS MARATHON

It is fiendishly difficult to think clearly about determinism and choice. If
determinism is true, are there ever any real choices? If an agent that
apparently has free will is actually deterministic, living in a deterministic
world, does this remove all choice, all opportunity? Here is an intuition
pump that explores the question by looking at a simplified world—chess
playing—in an artificially constructed deterministic world: the world of
activity performed by a computer.
   Suppose you install two different chess-playing programs on your
computer and yoke them together with a little supervisory program that pits
them against each other, game after game, in a potentially endless series.
Will they play the same game, over and over, until you turn off the
computer? You could set it up like that, but then you wouldn’t learn
anything interesting about the two programs, A and B. Suppose A beats B
in this oft-repeated game. You couldn’t infer from this that A is a better
program in general than B, or that A would beat B in a different game, and
you wouldn’t be able to learn anything from the exact repetition about the
strengths and weaknesses of the two different programs. Much more
informative would be to set up the tournament so that A and B play a
succession of different games. This can be readily arranged. If either chess
program consults the random-number generator during its calculations (if,
for instance, it periodically “flips a coin” to escape from situations where it
has no handy reason for doing one thing versus another in the course of its
searching for a good move), then in the following game the state of the
random-number generator will have changed (unless you arrange to have it
re-initialized), and hence different alternatives will be explored, in a
different order, leading on occasion to different moves being “chosen.” A
variant game will blossom, and the third game will be different in different
ways, resulting in a series in which no two games, like no two snowflakes,
are alike. Nevertheless, if you turned off the computer and then restarted it
running the same program, exactly the same variegated series of games
would spin out, because the same pseudo-random series of numbers would
determine all the “coin flips” used by both programs.

=== p. 339 ===

   Suppose, then, we set up such a chess universe involving two programs,
A and B, and study the results of a run of, say, a thousand games. We will
find lots of highly reliable patterns. Suppose we find that A always beats B,
in a thousand different games. That is a pattern that we will want to
explain, and saying, “Since the program is deterministic, A was caused
always to beat B,” would utterly fail to address our very reasonable
curiosity. We will want to know what it is about the structure, the methods,
the dispositions, of A that accounts for its superiority at chess. A has a
competence or power that B lacks, and we need to isolate this interesting
factor. It might be that the explanation lies at a low level; it might turn out,
for instance, that program A and program B are actually the same program,
identical chess-move evaluators at the source code level, but program A is
more efficiently compiled than B so that it can explore the game further
than program B can in the same number of machine cycles. In effect A
“thinks exactly the same thoughts” about chess as B, and B “knows”
everything about chess that A does, but A just thinks faster. (Serious chess,
tournament chess, is always played with a time clock; if you run out of
time before you’ve made all your moves, you lose.) More likely the
superiority of A to B would require explanation at a higher-level
perspective at which the everyday topics of chess decision-making appear:
representations of board positions, evaluations of possible continuations,
decisions about which continuations to pursue further, and so forth. Thus
program A may adjust the relative value of its pieces as the game
progresses, or have better evaluation functions of board positions, or decide
to terminate certain sorts of explorations earlier or later. It doesn’t “think
the same thoughts” as B; it “thinks better, more sophisticated thoughts.” (It
sorta thinks these thoughts, of course. It isn’t a conscious person.)
   It might actually be more telling if one program didn’t always win.
Suppose A almost always beats B, and suppose A evaluates moves using a
different set of principles. Then we would have something even more
interesting to explain. To investigate this causal question, we would need to
study the history of the thousand different games, looking for further
patterns. We would be sure to find plenty of them. Some of them would be
endemic to chess wherever it is played (e.g., the near certainty of B’s loss
in any game where B falls a rook behind), and some of them would be
peculiar to A and B as particular chess players (e.g., B’s penchant for
getting its queen out too early). We would find the standard patterns of

=== p. 340 ===

chess strategy, such as the fact that when B’s time is running out, B
searches less deeply in the remaining nodes of the game tree than it does
when it has more time remaining and is in the same local position. In short,
we would find a cornucopia of explanatory regularities, some exceptionless
(in our run of a thousand games) and others statistical.
   These recognizable chess-move patterns are salient moments in the
unfolding of a deterministic pageant that, observed from the perspective of
micro-causation, is pretty much all the same. What from one vantage point
appear to us to be two chess programs in suspenseful combat can be seen
through the “microscope” (as we watch instructions and data streaming
through the computer’s CPU) to be a single deterministic automaton
unfolding in the only way it can, its jumps already predictable by
examining the precise state of the pseudo-random-number generator and
the rest of the program and data. There are no “real” forks or branches in its
future; all the “choices” made by A and B are already determined by the
total state of the computer and its memory. Nothing, it seems, is really
possible in this world other than what actually happens. Suppose, for
instance, that an ominous mating net (a guaranteed win that might be hard
to discern) looms over A at time t, but it collapses when B runs out of time
and terminates its search for the key move one pulse too soon. That mating
net was never going to happen. (This is something we could prove, if we
doubted it, by running exactly the same tournament another day. At the
same moment in the series, B would run out of time again and terminate its
search at exactly the same point.)
   So what are we to say? Is this toy world really a world without
prevention or avoidance, without offense and defense, without lost
opportunities, without the thrust and parry of genuine agency, without
genuine possibilities? Admittedly, our chess programs, like insects and
fish, are much too simple agents to be plausible candidates for morally
significant free will, but the determinism of their world does not rob them
of their different powers, their different abilities to avail themselves of the
opportunities presented. If we want to understand what is happening in that
world, we may, indeed must, talk about how their informed choices cause
their circumstances to change, and about what they can and cannot do. If
we want to uncover the causal regularities that account for the patterns we
discover in those thousand games, we have to take seriously the perspective

=== p. 341 ===

that describes the world as containing two agents, A and B, trying to beat
each other in chess.
   Suppose we rig the tournament program so that whenever A wins, a bell
rings, and whenever B wins, a buzzer sounds. We start the marathon and an
observer who knows nothing about the program notes that the bell rings
quite frequently, the buzzer hardly ever. What explains this regularity, she
wants to know. The regularity with which A beats B can be discerned and
described independently of adopting the intentional stance, but it stands in
need of explanation. The only explanation—the right explanation—may be
that A generates better “beliefs” about what B will do if . . . than B
generates about what A will do if . . . In such a case, adopting the
intentional stance is required for finding the explanation (see chapters 33
and 42 for other examples of causal links that are utterly inexplicable until
you adopt the intentional stance).
   So far so good, but these “decisions” and “choices” seem to be only
sorta decisions and choices. They lack something, it seems, that genuine
choices have: “could have done otherwise.” But let’s look more closely at a
specific example, since appearances can be deceiving. It will help to add a
third chess-playing program, C, to our tournament program, and let’s
suppose that C is better than A and B, beating them both almost all the
time, and let’s suppose that the first twelve moves in a pair of these games
are exactly the same, and that C wins both games, beating both A and B,
though by somewhat different routes after those first twelve moves. The
experts huddle in retrospect and figure out that at move 12, the last
common move, if either A or B had castled, C would likely have lost.
Castling at move 12 was the key to victory, missed by both A and B.
   The designer of program A shrugs and says, “Well, A could have
castled,” and the designer of B adds, “My program too; B could have
castled.” But the designer of A was right and the designer of B was wrong!
How could this be? The tournament program T is deterministic, and if we
run through the games again, in exactly the same state, neither A nor B
castles. Isn’t the designer of A kidding herself? Not necessarily. What are
we trying to find out when we ask if A could have done otherwise? Looking
at precisely the same case, again and again, is utterly uninformative, but
looking at similar cases is in fact diagnostic. If we find that in many
similar circumstances in other games, A does pursue the evaluation slightly

=== p. 342 ===

farther, discovering the virtues of such moves and making them, then we
support the designer’s conviction that A could have castled then.
   We might find, in the minimal case, that flipping a single bit in the
(pseudo-)random-number generator would have resulted in A’s castling.
Suppose A’s designer digs deep down into the actual execution of the
program and shows that on this occasion A stopped “thinking” one pulse
too early. (Every chess program, no matter how brilliant, has to truncate its
searches arbitrarily at some point.) A considered castling, and had begun its
analysis of that outcome, but since time was running out, it consulted its
random-number generator, flipping a coin, in effect, and settled on the
move it had so far identified as the best—and it wasn’t castling. But if the
pseudo-random number had been a 1 instead of a 0, A would have gone on
considering for a little while longer, and castled instead. “Just flip one bit
in the random number and A wins!” says the designer. We would say that in
this case A’s failure to castle was a fluke, bad luck with the random-number
generator.
   When we turn to the designer of B, no such story in support of the claim
that B could have castled under the circumstances is forthcoming. It is true
that B “knows” that castling is legal under these conditions, and perhaps
actually briefly “considered” castling, but B was nowhere near choosing
castling on this occasion. Castling was a deep move, the sort of move that
is followed by “(!)” in the newspaper chess columns, and far beyond
program B’s limited analytical powers. So here we have an entirely
deterministic world—program T—in which A could have castled but B
could not have castled. The difference between A and B is real and
explanatory, a difference in competence or ability. One way we could put it
is apparently paradoxical:
          A could have castled at time t but the universe couldn’t have had
          a castling event at time t.
What could possibly license this way of describing the situation? Simply
this: if we consider A divorced from its immediate environment—which
includes the random-number generator—then whether A castles or not is
undetermined. It depends on something that is strictly speaking outside A.
Given the way the rest of the universe was arranged at t, castling was not
possible for A, but that is “not A’s fault.” B, in contrast, could not have
castled; it was not in B’s nature to castle. To imagine B castling would
require too many alterations of reality.

=== p. 343 ===

   This is a useful discovery: a distinction between what A and B “could
do” that does not depend on indeterminism. Even in a deterministic world
we can see that A can do kinds of things that B cannot do, and this
difference is part of the explanation of why A beats B. The fact that,
because determinism is true in this world, A and B can only do what they
actually do on the specific occasion (and would do it again and again if
exactly the same circumstances were repeated) is simply not interesting,
not relevant to the explanation we get of the perfectly objective and visible
regularity: A beats B.
   A chess-playing program is not a moral agent, and it is not morally
responsible for the choices it makes—its world is entirely amoral, and
violating one of the rules of chess is simply unthinkable for a chess
program, and hence requires no penalties for violations. But as we have just
seen, even in the simple deterministic world of computer chess we can
make a real and important distinction between A and B. Sometimes when A
does something stupid or clever we can say, “A could have done otherwise,
but B could not have done otherwise.” If you think that this must be a
mistake “because neither A nor B could ever have done otherwise since the
world is deterministic,” it is you making the mistake.
   A and B differ in chess competence, and “could have done otherwise”
nicely captures an aspect of that difference, as we have just seen. What
about moral competence? When people say of some human beings who act
badly that “they could have done otherwise,” and use this as their
justification for not excusing them, while agreeing that other human beings
in similar circumstances could not have done otherwise, they are not
making a mistake either—and this is independent of whether or not
determinism is true. They are pointing to a real difference in moral
competence that does not depend on either indeterminism or determinism,
and that can ground a difference in our response.
   To see this more clearly, take the perspective of the programmer who
designed program B. She wants to know if she has uncovered a weakness in
B. Here is a game in which not castling cost B the victory; could B have
castled then? If all it would take for that to happen was the flip of a single
bit in the random-number generator, then perhaps no design improvements
are called for. As often as not, in similar circumstances, B will castle, and
perhaps that’s as good as anyone could hope for. A program must always
use random numbers now and then (as coin flips) to terminate search and

=== p. 344 ===

get on with the game, and hence there will always be cases where thanks to
the flip, the search stops just this side of discovery. And notice that the
situation is not improved if we give program B (or program A) a quantum
random-number generator, say, a Geiger counter that spews out bits based
on the undetermined trajectories of subatomic particles. Then consider
what we would say about B in the case where B doesn’t castle because of a
single 0 where a 1 might have been. If the quantum number generator
yields a 0, B castles; if it yields a 1, B doesn’t castle. “B could have
castled,” says an observer when the 1 comes up. Yes, but B is no freer for
all that. In a series of games in which this sort of opportunity comes up,
half the time B will castle and half the time B won’t, whether B’s random-number generator is “genuine” or “pseudo.” The philosopher David
Wiggins (1973, p. 54) once wrote of the “cosmic unfairness” of
determinism, but what our intuition pump about the computer chess
tournament shows is the equal “cosmic unfairness” of indeterminism. B is
“at the mercy of” its random-number generator or its pseudo-randomnumber generator. (So, of course, is A; so are we all.) There is no reason to
prefer the genuinely random-number generator—unless of course you plan
to play chess against an omniscient God who can see into your pseudorandom-number generator and plan accordingly!
   So we’re still looking for a reason to want indeterminism to be true.
Perhaps we can have all the free will worth wanting without indeterminism
playing any role. Here’s another candidate reason:
         I can’t change the past, but if indeterminism is true, I can change
         the future!
Nope. Change the future from what to what? From what it was going to be
to what it is going to be? You can no more change the future than you can
change the past. The concept is incoherent. So:
         If determinism is true, I can’t change the future, and if
         determinism is false, I can’t change the future. So it follows that I
         can’t change the future.
Why does it seem that we want to change the future? Because we want to
be able to foresee disasters and do something so those disasters don’t
happen. And we can do this, independently of indeterminism. If somebody
throws a brick at you, and you see it and duck, you can avoid being hit by
the brick. Good for you. Was the collision going to happen? In one sense

=== p. 345 ===

yes, since the brick was clearly on a trajectory right for your head, but since
you saw it (since you were caused to see it by the light bouncing off of it
into your eyes, where your brain calculated the risk and was caused to take
action), you avoided it. Of course, if you had wanted to avoid avoiding it (if
some reason had occurred to you for why you might actually do better by
letting it hit you), you could do just that. Some observer might not be able
to tell, right up to the last moment, whether you were going to take the hit
or not. And if he was betting on you to duck, he’d lose. We’re back at our
reason for wanting to be unpredictable, which does not require
indeterminism.
   What does this intuition pump accomplish? It takes the familiar phrase
“could have done otherwise” and shows that contrary to widespread but ill-examined opinion, a valuable version of it does not depend on
indeterminism. If there is a sense of “could have done otherwise” that is
both incompatible with determinism and morally important—not merely a
metaphysical curiosity, you might say—this has yet to be established, and
the burden of proof lies with those who think so. One more “obvious” point
exposed as not so obvious after all.

=== p. 346 ===

71. ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY

So far, we’ve been looking at trivial choices, not involving moral
responsibility at all: rock, paper, scissors; chess moves; and brick-ducking.
Perhaps it is when we are specifically looking at our attempts to be moral
agents, not just intentional systems like chess-playing computers and
stotting gazelles, that indeterminism is truly desirable. Many thinkers have
thought so. For them, these exercises are just so much distraction. Here is a
nice clear version of what some thinkers take to be the decisive argument.
It is due in this form to the philosopher Galen Strawson (2010):

1. You do what you do, in any given situation, because of the way you are.
2. So in order to be ultimately responsible for what you do, you have to be
  ultimately responsible for the way you are—at least in certain crucial
  mental respects.
3. But you cannot be ultimately responsible for the way you are in any
  respect at all.
4. So you cannot be ultimately responsible for what you do.
The first premise is undeniable: “the way you are” is meant to include your
total state at the time, however you got into it. Whatever state it is, your
action flows from it non-miraculously. The second premise observes that
you couldn’t be “ultimately” responsible for what you do unless you were
“ultimately” responsible for getting yourself into that state—at least in
some regards. But according to step (3) this is impossible.
   So step (4), the conclusion, does seem to follow logically. Several
thinkers have found this argument decisive and important. But is it really?
Let’s look more closely at step (3). Why can’t you be ultimately
responsible for some respects, at least, of the way you are? In everyday life
we make exactly this distinction, and it matters morally. Suppose you
design and build a robot and send it out into the world unattended and
unsupervised and knowing full well the sorts of activities it might engage
in, and suppose it seriously injures somebody. Aren’t you responsible for
this, at least in some respects? Most people would say so. You made it; you
should have foreseen the dangers—indeed you did foresee some of the

=== p. 347 ===

dangers—and now you are to blame, at least in part, for the damage done.
Few would have any sympathy for you if you insisted that you weren’t
responsible at all for the harm done by your robot.
   Now consider a slightly different case: you design and build a person
(yourself at a later time) and send yourself out into the risky world
knowing full well the possible dangers you would encounter. You get
yourself drunk in a bar and then get in your car and drive off. Aren’t you
responsible, at least in part, for the “way you were” when you crashed into
a school bus? Common sense says of course. (The bartender, or your
compliant host, may share the responsibility.) But how could this be, in the
face of Strawson’s knockdown argument? Well, remember that Strawson
says you can’t be absolutely responsible for the way you are. Okay, but so
what? Who would think it was important to be absolutely responsible? That
is indeed a state that is utterly impossible, even if indeterminism is true!
(So much for the idea that this argument gives us a reason for hoping for
indeterminism.) Here is what Strawson (2010) says:
          To be absolutely responsible for what one does, one would have
          to be causa sui, the cause of oneself, and this is impossible (it
          certainly wouldn’t be more possible if we had immaterial souls
          rather than being wholly material).
Absolute responsibility is a red herring, a blessing nobody should hanker
for. Strawson (2003) thinks otherwise, and criticizes me for neglecting it:
          He doesn’t establish the kind of absolute free will and moral
          responsibility that most people want to believe in and do believe
          in. That can’t be done, and he knows it.
He’s exactly right: I don’t establish the kind of free will most people want
to believe in, and I know it. But I think they are wrong to want to believe in
it, and wrong to believe in it if they do. The burden falls on Strawson and
others to show why we ought to care about ultimate responsibility—or the
determinism/indeterminism issue—in our lives. They can define a variety
of free will that is incompatible with determinism, and show that lots of
folks think that’s important, but they also need to show that those folks
aren’t deceiving themselves. Why should anybody care? (Note my
rhetorical question. I’m leading with my chin. I would be happy for
Strawson or somebody else to step up to the plate and try to answer it, but
so far there are no volunteers.)

=== p. 348 ===

  Before leaving Strawson’s argument, let me ask if you have noticed its
uncanny resemblance to an earlier argument. I will revise the earlier
argument into a form a little closer to Strawson’s to bring out the
similarities.

1. A mammal is a mammal, in any given context, because of the way it is.
2. In order to be a mammal, you have to become the way you are by having
  a mammal for a mother.
3. But this must be true of your mother, and her mother, and so forth ad
  infinitum, which is impossible.
4. So you cannot be a mammal because mammals are utterly impossible.
  You should always be leery of any such “ancestral” argument. It is
almost certain to be a disguised instance of the ancient fallacy known as the
sorites (or “heap”) argument:

1. A single grain of wheat is not a heap.
2. Adding a grain to a single grain does not make a heap.
3. You can’t make a non-heap into a heap by adding a single grain.
4. Therefore there are no such things as heaps!
Philosophers have written about the sorites paradox and the problems of the
vague boundaries of terms (which is what the paradox obviously depends
on) for thousands of years, and there is still no resolution of just how to
diagnose and avoid the fallacy. (See the Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy online for an excellent and up-to-the-minute survey.) There are
even a few brave philosophers who declare the sorites to be valid, and they
try to live with the “fact” that there are no bald men and no non-bald men
either. Tough position to defend! But as chapter 43 showed, Darwin taught
us how to turn our backs on the sorites; we don’t need to find “principled”
dividing lines between categories ranked in ancestral order.
   To my knowledge I am the first to point out the resemblance of
Strawson’s argument—and the other arguments of this ilk in the free-will
literature—to a sorites paradox, but there it is. I think it is just as obvious
that people can gradually become morally responsible during their passage
from infancy to adulthood as it is that lineages of reptiles and then
therapsids can gradually become a lineage of mammals over the eons. You
don’t have to be an absolute mammal to be a mammal, and you don’t have
to be absolutely responsible to be responsible, or have absolute free will to

=== p. 349 ===

have a kind of free will worth wanting. In fact, since absolute free will
would be miraculous, there really needs to be a powerful argument to show
why anybody would covet such a thing. Do they want to be God? Too bad,
they’re out of luck, but the next best thing is quite a good thing to be.

=== p. 350 ===

72. SPHEXISHNESS

Doug Hofstadter (1982) coined the term “sphexishness” for a familiar sort
of rigid, robotic mindlessness that is often mistaken for great cleverness.
The defining example of sphexishness, and the source of the term, is a wasp
with a curious behavior. Doug and I had independently been struck by a
passage in a popular science book, The Machinery of the Brain, written by
Dean Wooldridge (1963), who described the Sphex wasp thus:
         When the time comes for egg-laying, the wasp Sphex builds a
         burrow for the purpose and seeks out a cricket which she stings in
         such a way as to paralyze but not kill it. She drags the cricket into
         the burrow, lays her eggs alongside, closes the burrow, then flies
         away, never to return. In due course, the eggs hatch and the wasp
         grubs feed off the paralyzed cricket, which has not decayed,
         having been kept in the wasp equivalent of deep freeze. To the
         human mind, such an elaborately organized and seemingly
         purposeful routine conveys a convincing flavor of logic and
         thoughtfulness—until more details are examined. For example,
         the wasp’s routine is to bring the paralyzed cricket to the burrow,
         leave it on the threshold, go inside to see that all is well, emerge,
         and then drag the cricket in. If the cricket is moved a few inches
         away while the wasp is inside making her preliminary inspection,
         the wasp, on emerging from the burrow, will bring the cricket
         back to the threshold, but not inside, and will then repeat the
         preparatory procedure of entering the burrow to see that
         everything is all right. If again the cricket is removed a few
         inches while the wasp is inside, once again she will move the
         cricket up to the threshold and re-enter the burrow for a final
         check. The wasp never thinks of pulling the cricket straight in. On
         one occasion this procedure was repeated forty times, always
         with the same result. [p. 82]
A perfect example, it seems, of the imperfect, uncomprehending
competence that we unmask when we expose the superficial, pseudo-

=== p. 351 ===

understanding of a second-rate computer program. We have recently
learned, however, that Wooldridge gave us—as popular science writers so
often do—an oversimplified sketch of the phenomenon. The psychologist
Lars Chittka, in a note to me, quoted from the work of Jean-Henri Fabre (in
1879), which had apparently been the source for Wooldridge, who, if he had
read on in Fabre, would have found that in fact only some Sphex wasps are
sphexish. In fact, Fabre was eager to make the point. If at first blush you
thought Sphex was clever, and at second blush you thought Sphex was
stupid, try third blush, and find that some Sphex wasps are not so sphexish
after all. Chittka sent me the German translation of Fabre (I still haven’t
located the French), which includes the following sentence: “Nach zwei
oder drei Malen, . . . packt ihre Fuehler mit den Kieferzangen und schleift
sie in die Hoehle. Wer war nun der Dummkopf?” (After two or three times,
. . . she grabbed her [the prey’s] antennae with her pincers and slid it into
the hole. Now who’s the dummy?)
    So the adjective sphexish is a bit of a misnomer, but since it has caught
on, the Sphex wasps will just have to endure the insult. They are lucky, in a
way, to be in the limelight of nonspecialist attention, which probably has a
nonnegligible fitness enhancement. (Which habitat would you vote to
protect, Sphex habitat or Humdrumbeetle habitat?) Sphex wasps may not be
“charismatic” like elephants and tigers and wolves, but they are rather well
known—for their problematic sphexishness.
    Sphexishness is an important property not so much because so many
whole, simple animals—insects, worms, fish—exhibit it (though they do,
in varying degrees), but because it gives us a term for the limited, robotic,
myopic, competences out of which we can build fancier, more versatile,
comprehending minds. The building blocks in any mind model had better
be sphexish! Or, as I noted earlier, the building blocks should be sorta
minds, pale shadows of our minds. Sphexishness is also useful to
distinguish morally competent minds from morally incompetent minds. To
the extent that a human being is sphexish, because of a brain tumor or brain
injury or serious imbalance of neuromodulators or mental illness or sheer
ignorance or immaturity, that human being could not have done otherwise
in the relevant sense.
    The persistent biologist interfering with the Sphex wasp in order to
expose its sphexishness is the very model of the manipulative agent we
rightly dread. Many philosophers’ thought experiments about free will

=== p. 352 ===

depend on invoking just such a puppeteer, or a nefarious neurosurgeon who
has secretly wired someone up to do his bidding. Presumably the moral of
these scary tales is that even if there is no actual puppeteer, the fact that our
behavior is caused by various features of our environments, as processed
through our perceptual systems and brains, shows that there might as well
be a puppeteer. (The cover illustration of Sam Harris’s little book Free Will
(2012) is a set of puppeteer control strings.) But this invited conclusion is a
clear non sequitur. When the “control” by the environment runs through
our well-working perceptual systems and our undeluded brains, it is
nothing to dread; in fact, nothing is more desirable than our being caused
by the things and events around us to generate true beliefs about them that
we can then use in modulating our behavior to our advantage. Photons
bouncing off air holes in the tidal flats into my eyes are apt to cause me to
grab my clam rake and basket and start digging. If this is a case of being
controlled by my environment, I’m all for it. And, like most people, I do
not feel threatened or manipulated when my friends offer me sumptuous
meals, knowing full well that I will be unable to resist the temptation to eat
them.
   Another thing you will notice about the puppeteer and neurosurgeon
examples in the literature on free will is that the intervention is always—
always—secret. Why should this be? Because it is only when we are
unwittingly being caused to act or choose by some other, secret agent that
the intuitions flood in to the effect that our will is not free. The reason for
this is not far to seek, and harks back to the insight that inaugurated game
theory: when an agent knows about the attempt at manipulation by another
agent, it thereupon seeks countermeasures, and at the very least adjusts its
behavior to better cope with this discovery. The competitive interactions
between the two agents involve multiple levels of feedback, and hence
diminishing “control” by the would-be manipulator. And if the intervention
is not only not secret, but requested by the “puppet,” the tables are turned
completely.
   This we can demonstrate by simply altering the standard cases slightly,
turning the knobs on the intuition pumps. The philosopher Harry Frankfurt
(1969) invented an intuition pump in which a person is being monitored by
secretly implanted neurostimulation gadgetry that is controlled by a
neurosurgeon who makes sure that that person decides the way he wants
that person to decide. If you, as that person, are faced with a dilemma and

=== p. 353 ===

choose option A rather than B, then if this is what the neurosurgeon wanted
you to choose, he does nothing; if instead his gauges show that you are
about to choose option B, he hits the button and prevents you from
choosing option B, and you choose A after all. You don’t feel a thing. Did
you choose freely in either case? Over the years philosophers have written
hundreds of pages about “Frankfurt cases” with many variations, but one
turning of the knobs that makes a huge difference has never to my
knowledge been explored. Here it is:
   Wanting to tame your profligate love of rich desserts, you have
contracted with the good doctor to implant this device, and you are paying
him a handsome fee to monitor your every meal, providing a safety net that
keeps you from ordering the hot fudge sundaes and slices of cheese cake.
Both of you hope he never has to deploy his button, and soon you almost
forget that he or his assistant is electronically at your elbow; you are cured
and the gadget has recorded an unbroken string of hundreds of A choices
(“No thanks, just a cup of black coffee”). If those aren’t examples of you
choosing responsibly and freely, why not? Wasn’t it wise of you to get help
with your somewhat fragile willpower?

=== p. 354 ===

73. THE BOYS FROM BRAZIL: ANOTHER BOOM CRUTCH

In 2004, the psychologists Joshua Greene and Jonathan Cohen co-authored
“For the Law, Neuroscience Changes Everything and Nothing,” which was
published in the prestigious journal Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society. This influential article conjures up a revolution in the law,
triggered by scientific discoveries.
         [T]he law says that it presupposes nothing more than a
         metaphysically modest notion of free will that is perfectly
         compatible with determinism. However, we argue that the law’s
         intuitive support is ultimately grounded in a metaphysically
         overambitious, libertarian [indeterministic] notion of free will
         that is threatened by determinism and, more pointedly, by
         forthcoming cognitive neuroscience. [p. 1776]
The case they make is subtle; it has to be, because they grant that there are
a wealth of arguments in support of compatibilism (the view defended by
me here), but they want to show that actually “we are all of two minds”
about free will. They offer a thought experiment designed to reveal the
dependence of everyday commonsense thinking on indeterminism. Note
that this is pretty much what I’ve just been calling for: show us, please,
both that and why we should care about indeterminism. Their thought
experiment was inspired by the film The Boys from Brazil, about Nazi
scientists who raise Hitler clones (thanks to some salvaged DNA). Here it
is:
         Let us suppose, then, that a group of scientists has managed to
         create an individual—call him Mr Puppet—who, by design,
         engages in some criminal behavior: say, a murder done during a
         drug deal gone bad. [p. 1780]
Here is what they say about their thought experiment:
         Yes, he is as rational as other criminals, and, yes, it was his
         desires and beliefs that produced his actions. But those beliefs
         and desires were rigged by external forces, and that is why,

=== p. 355 ===

         intuitively, he deserves our pity more than our moral
         condemnation. . . . what is the real difference between us and Mr
         Puppet? One obvious difference is that Mr Puppet is the victim of
         a diabolical plot whereas most people, we presume, are not. But
         does this matter? The thought that Mr Puppet is not fully
         responsible depends on the idea that his actions were externally
         determined. . . . But the fact that these forces are connected to the
         desires and intentions of evil scientists is irrelevant, is it not?
         What matters is only that these forces are beyond Mr Puppet’s
         control, that they’re not really his. [p. 1780]
What do you think? Is this a good intuition pump for its purpose, or not?
Amusingly, the authors note that this is a question worth considering:
“Daniel Dennett might object that the story of Mr Puppet is just a
misleading ‘intuition pump.’ ” Indeed I do. I say it’s a boom crutch. But
they shrug off this hunch and carry on: “It seems to us that the more one
knows about Mr Puppet and his life the less inclined one is to see him as
truly responsible for his actions and consider our punishing him as a
worthy end in itself.”
   So let’s take a closer look, turning the knobs on this intuition pump to
see what is actually doing the work. I propose to adjust four knobs. First,
let’s get rid of the diabolical plot—which the authors themselves insist
does not matter. I am surprised that they are so blithe about introducing a
“nefarious neurosurgeon” and supposing that this is obviously innocent,
since doubts have been expressed for years about such a move, but we can
test their conviction by replacing “a group of scientists” with “an
indifferent environment”:
         BEFORE: Let us suppose, then, that a group of scientists has
         managed to create an individual—call him Mr Puppet—who, by
         design, engages in some criminal behavior: say, a murder done
         managed to create an individual—call him Mr Puppet—who, by
         design, engages in some criminal behavior: say, a murder done
Second knob: With the plotters gone, we have to replace “by design” with
“with high probability”:

=== p. 356 ===

          BEFORE: Let us suppose, then, that an indifferent environment
          has managed to create an individual—call him Mr Puppet—who,
          by design, engages in some criminal behavior: say, a murder done
          managed to create an individual—call him Mr Puppet—who, with
          high probability, engages in some criminal behavior: say, a
          murder done during a drug deal gone bad.
Third knob: I want to change the motivation of the crime—still a murder,
but in a rather different setting. (That shouldn’t matter, should it?)
          BEFORE: Let us suppose, then, that an indifferent environment
          has managed to create an individual—call him Mr Puppet—who,
          with high probability, engages in some criminal behavior: say, a
          murder done during a drug deal gone bad.
          managed to create an individual—call him Mr Puppet—who,
          with high probability, engages in some criminal behavior: say, a
          murder done to cover up an embezzlement.
Fourth knob: Let’s change the culprit’s name. After all, it’s just a name.
          BEFORE: Let us suppose, then, that an indifferent environment
          has managed to create an individual—call him Mr Puppet—who,
          with high probability, engages in some criminal behavior: say, a
          murder done to cover up an embezzlement.
          managed to create an individual—call him Captain Autonomy—
          who, with high probability, engages in some criminal behavior:
          say, a murder done to cover up an embezzlement.
What intuitions does this pump for you now? The same intuitions? Are you
more inclined to pity than condemnation? Maybe it would help if we
fleshed out the details a little further. Here is my friendly amendment to
Greene and Cohen’s intuition pump:
          Captain Autonomy majored in economics at Harvard, and after
          graduation he went to work at Lehman Brothers, where all around
          him people were cheating and making fortunes in the process. He
          fell in love with a gold-digging heartbreaker, who threatened to

=== p. 357 ===

         leave him if he didn’t get rich quick. He saw his chance, a
         virtually undetectable embezzlement, almost surely an invisible
         crime, and he knowingly took the risk, but, alas, against all the
         odds a witness arose, who made the mistake of standing too close
         to the railing on the penthouse garden, . . . a quick “stumble”—
         Oops!—and the witness was sent to his death on the avenue
         below. Suspicions were aroused, and soon enough Captain
         Autonomy was under arrest.
  Are you still inclined to think that because his actions were externally
determined he is “not truly responsible”? Even if you are still tempted to
see Captain Autonomy as a victim of his (posh) environment, I think you
have to agree that the temptation is much diminished, and might even be a
hangover of sorts from the earlier telling. (Or maybe I’ve just exploited
your emotions in the opposite direction, counting on your bloodthirsty
desire to punish the greedy Wall Street types for their role in our economic
malaise.) I’m not claiming that my variations prove that people are or can
be responsible in spite of being determined; I am just claiming that this
particular intuition pump is not at all to be trusted, since the (available,
permissible) knob settings are interfering so much with our judgments. It
may not have been designed to blow smoke, but it certainly manages to
hinder clear thinking.

=== p. 358 ===

SUMMARY

People care deeply about having free will, but they also seem to have
misguided ideas about what free will is or could be (like their misguided
ideas about color and consciousness). Our decisions are not little miracles
in the brain that violate the physics and chemistry that account for the rest
of our bodies’ processes, even if many folk think this must be what happens
if our decisions are to be truly free. We can’t conclude from this, however,
that then we don’t have free will, because free will in this bonkers sense is
not the only concept of free will. The law, according with common sense,
contrasts signing a contract “of your own free will” with signing a contract
under duress or under the influence of hallucination or other mental
derangement. Here is a perfectly familiar sense of free will, a distinction
presupposed by many of the practices and attitudes that comprise our
manifest image, that has no demonstrated dependence on the bonkers sense.
   For hundreds of years there have been philosophers who have insisted
that this sense of free will is the important sense, the one we should care
about, and it is compatible with determinism, with materialism, with
physics and chemistry reigning unchallenged. The intuition pumps and
other thinking tools in this part are designed to support and advance the
understanding of this prospect, compatibilism. It has had many versions
over the years, and is probably the consensus not only among philosophers
but also among judges, lawyers, and others who have to make distinctions
about who is responsible for what and who is excused because they didn’t
have free will when they acted. Some scientists are now challenging this
consensus, and they may of course be right to do so. Let’s take a hard look
at the arguments.
   Maybe science is teaching us something radical, even revolutionary: that
nobody is ever responsible for anything they do, and there is no sound basis
for distinguishing some acts as praiseworthy and others as blameworthy.
But such a revolutionary conclusion needs a lot more conscientious
attention to detail than it has so far received from the scientists declaring it.
The nefarious neurosurgeon disabled her patient with nothing but a false
idea; a mistaken view promulgated by influential scientists could rob
people of a legitimate and life-enhancing variety of free will. Caution is
called for, on all sides.

=== p. 359 ===

   Compatibilism, for all its popularity among philosophers, has always
provoked suspicion. Immanuel Kant famously called it a “wretched
subterfuge,” and writers today often express doubts about the sincerity of
those of us who maintain it. This is as it should be, actually. Science
teaches us to be especially on guard against wishful thinking, and many of
the rules of scientific investigation are specifically designed to prevent us
from being taken in by our hopes when we think we are being convinced by
the evidence. Imagine that some astronomers announce that a giant asteroid
is going to strike our planet in ten years, obliterating all life, and then
another group of astronomers claim that their reanalysis of the data shows
that we can all breathe easily; the asteroid will miss Earth by a narrow
margin. Good news, but how do we know the second group of astronomers
aren’t deceiving themselves—or just deceiving us with a benign lie? Check
and recheck their calculations; mount an independent attempt at
replication; don’t just gratefully accept their conclusion because it doesn’t
contain any obvious errors and it appeals to you. But also never forget that
it is possible that they are right. Don’t make the opposite mistake of
discrediting—on “general principles”—something that seems “too good to
be true.”
   Is compatibilism too good to be true? I think not; I think it is true, and
we can soundly and roundly dismiss the alarmists, at the same time
reforming and revising our understanding of what underwrites our concept
of moral responsibility. But that is a task for the future, and it should be the
work of many hands. So far as I can see, it is both the most difficult and the
most important philosophical problem confronting us today. The stakes are
high, the issues thorny, and emotions tend to cloud our judgment. We will
need all our thinking tools and more, which we will have to make as we go
along.

