=== chunk: dennett-2013-intuition-pumps/part-ix-disposition ===
title: Part IX subset — Chs. 75–76 (Naïve Auto-anthropology; Chmess)
source_pdf: docs/sources/dennett-2013-intuition-pumps/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 364-372
page_scheme: pdf
plan_page_start: 364
plan_page_end: 372
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 364 ===

75. PHILOSOPHY AS NAÏVE AUTO-ANTHROPOLOGY

Patrick Hayes, the artificial intelligence researcher, once set out on a
project to axiomatize the naïve (or folk) physics of liquids. The idea was to
provide a robot with the propositions it would need to use as its core beliefs
if it was going to interact with people (who rely on folk physics every day).
It proved to be more challenging than he had anticipated, and he wrote an
interesting paper about the project, “The Naïve Physics Manifesto” (Hayes,
1978). In the naïve physics of liquids, everything that strikes naïve folks as
counterintuitive is, of course, ruled out: siphons are “impossible” and so
are pipettes, but you can mop up liquid with a fluffy towel, and pull water
out of a well with a suction pump. A robot equipped with such a store of
“knowledge” would be as surprised by a siphon as most of us were when
first we saw one in action. Hayes’s project was what I would call
sophisticated naïve physics, because he was under no illusions; he knew the
theory he was trying to axiomatize was false, however useful in daily life.
This was an exercise in what might be called axiomatic anthropology: you
treat what the folks say—and agree about—as your axioms or theorems,
and try to render the data set consistent, resolving any contradictions
encountered. And, of course, he didn’t bother rounding up any actual
informants; he figured that he knew the naïve physics of liquids as well as
any normal person did, so he used himself as his sole informant: axiomatic
auto-anthropology.1
   Now compare Hayes’s project with the philosophical projects in analytic
metaphysics, which often strike me as naïve naïve auto-anthropology since
the participants in this research seem to be convinced that their program
actually gets at something true, not just something believed true by a
particular subclass of human beings (Anglophone philosophers of the
analytic metaphysics persuasion). Otherwise, the programs seem identical:
you gather your shared intuitions, test and provoke them by engaging in
mutual intuition-pumping, and then try to massage the resulting data set
into a consistent “theory,” based on “received” principles that count,
ideally, as axioms. I’ve asked a number of analytic metaphysicians whether
they can distinguish their enterprise from naïve naïve auto-anthropology of
their clan, and have not yet received any compelling answers.

=== p. 365 ===

   The alternative is sophisticated naïve anthropology (both auto- and
hetero-)—the anthropology that reserves judgment about whether any of
the theorems adduced by the exercise deserve to be trusted—and this is a
feasible and frequently valuable project. I propose that this is the enterprise
to which analytic metaphysicians should turn, since it requires rather
minimal adjustments to their methods and only one major revision of their
raison d’être: they must roll back their pretensions and acknowledge that
their research is best seen as a preparatory reconnaissance of the terrain of
the manifest image, suspending both belief and disbelief the way
anthropologists do when studying an exotic culture: let’s pretend for the
nonce that the natives are right, and see what falls out. Since at least a large
part of philosophy’s task, in my vision of the discipline, consists in
negotiating the traffic back and forth between the manifest and scientific
images, it is a good idea for philosophers to analyze what they are up
against in the way of folk assumptions before launching into their theory-building and theory-criticizing.
   One of the hallmarks of sophisticated naïve anthropology is its openness
to counterintuitive discoveries. As long as you’re doing naïve anthropology,
counterintuitiveness (to the natives) counts against your reconstruction;
when you shift gears and begin asking which aspects of the naïve “theory”
are true, counterintuitiveness loses its force as an objection and even
becomes, on occasion, a sign of significant progress. In science in general,
counterintuitive results are prized, after all.
   One of the weaknesses of auto-anthropology is that one’s own intuitions
are apt to be distorted by one’s theoretical predilections. Linguists have
known for a long time that they get so wrapped up in their theories they are
no longer reliable sources of linguistic intuition. Can you really say in
English, “The boy the man the woman kissed punched ran away,” or is my
theory of clause embedding tricking my “ear”? Their raw, untutored
intuitions have been sullied by too much theory, so they recognize that they
must go out and ask nonlinguists for their linguistic intuitions.
Philosophers have recently begun to appreciate this point, in the new
enthusiasm for so-called experimental philosophy (see Knobe and Nichols,
2008). It is early days still, and some of the pioneer efforts are
unimpressive, but at least philosophers are getting used to the idea that they
can no longer declare various propositions to be obviously true on the sole
grounds that they seem smashingly obvious to them. (In a similar vein,

=== p. 366 ===

Hayes might have surprised himself about the chief tenets of folk physics if
he had gone to the trouble of interviewing a random sample of folk instead
of just treating himself as exemplary.)
   So here is a project, a particular sort of sophisticated naïve anthropology,
that philosophers should seriously consider undertaking as a survey of the
terrain of the commonsense or manifest image of the world before
launching into their theories of knowledge, justice, beauty, truth, goodness,
time, causation, and so on, to make sure they actually aim their analyses
and arguments at targets that are relevant to the rest of the world, both lay
concerns and scientific concerns. Such a systematic inquiry would yield
something like a catalogue of the unreformed conceptual terrain that sets
the problems for the theorist, the metaphysics of the manifest image, if you
like. This is where we philosophers have to start in our attempts to
negotiate back and forth between the latest innovations in the scientific
image, and it wouldn’t hurt to have a careful map of this folk terrain
instead of just eyeballing it. This is the other half, one might say, of the
reform that turned philosophy of science from an armchair fantasy field
into a serious partnership with actual science, when philosophers of science
decided that they really had to know a lot of current science from the
inside. Once we think about our philosophical tasks with this image in
mind, we can see that a great deal of the informal trudging around, backing
and filling, counterexample-mongering and intuition-busting that fills the
pages of philosophy journals is—at best—an attempt to organize a
mutually acceptable consensus about this territory.

1 Hayes’s work inspired others. See the anthology edited by Bobrow (1985). Authors of one of
the essays therein remark, “Naïve physics is in itself an ambiguous term. Is it just bad physics? Is
it psychology? Artificial intelligence? Physics?” (Bobrow, 1985, p. 13). The answer, I submit, is
that naïve physics is the attempt to make the physics part of our manifest image rigorous enough
to support automated deductive reasoning.

=== p. 367 ===

76. HIGHER-ORDER TRUTHS OF CHMESS

Consider this chess puzzle.1 White to checkmate in two.

It appeared recently in the Boston Globe, and what startled me was that I
had thought it had been proved that you can’t checkmate with a lone knight
(and a king, of course). I was wrong; as David Misialowski pointed out to
me in a recent e-mail, it has been proved that you cannot checkmate your
opponent’s king when only his king and your king and knight are on the
board. The fact that the proposition you can never checkmate with a lone
knight and king is not a truth of chess is a higher-order truth of chess.
   Philosophy is traditionally an a priori discipline, like mathematics, or at
least it has an a priori methodology at its core, and this fact cuts two ways.
On the one hand, it excuses philosophers from spending tedious hours in
the lab or out in the field, and from learning data-gathering techniques,
statistical methods, geography, history, foreign languages, empirical
science, and so on, so they have plenty of time for honing their
philosophical skills. On the other hand, as is often noted, philosophy can be
created out of just about anything, and this is not always a blessing. For
those of you younger readers who are thinking of undertaking a career in
the field, and I hope some of you are, this chapter is a warning that the very
freedom and abstractness of philosophy can be weaknesses. This chapter is
also a travel guide for outsiders about some of the folkways and pitfalls of
philosophy.
   Consider, as a paradigm of a priori truths, the truths of chess. It is an
empirical fact that people play chess, and there are mountains of other

=== p. 368 ===

empirical facts about chess, about how people have been playing it for
centuries, how they often use handsomely carved pieces on inlaid boards,
and so forth. No knowledge of these empirical facts plays an indispensable
role in the activity of working out the a priori truths of chess, which also
exist in abundance. All you need to know are the rules of the game. There
are exactly twenty legal opening moves (sixteen pawn moves and four
knight moves); a king and a lone bishop cannot achieve checkmate against
a lone king, and neither can a king and a lone knight, and so forth. Working
out these a priori truths about chess is not always easy. Proving just what is
and is not possible within the rules of chess is an intricate task, and
mistakes can be made. For instance, a few years ago, a computer chess
program discovered a mating net—a guaranteed or forced win—consisting
of more than two hundred moves without a capture. This disproved a longstanding “theorem” of chess and has forced a change in the rules of the
game. It used to be that fifty moves without a capture by either side
constituted a draw (stalemate), but since this lengthy mating net is
unbreakable, and leads to a win, it is unreasonable to maintain the fifty-move stalemate. (Before computers began playing chess, nobody imagined
that there could be a guaranteed win anywhere near this length.) All this
can be pretty interesting, and many highly intelligent people have devoted
their minds to investigating this system of a priori truths of chess.2
   Some philosophical research projects—or problematics, to speak with
the more literary types—are rather like working out the truths of chess. A
set of mutually agreed-upon rules are presupposed—and seldom discussed
—and the implications of those rules are worked out, articulated, debated,
refined. So far, so good. Chess is a deep and important human artifact,
about which much of value has been written. But some philosophical
research projects are more like working out the truths of chmess. Chmess is
just like chess except that the king can move two squares in any direction,
not one. I just invented it—though no doubt others have explored it in
depth to see if it is worth playing. Probably it isn’t. It probably has other
names. I didn’t bother investigating these questions because although they
have true answers, they just aren’t worth my time and energy to discover.
Or so I think. There are just as many a priori truths of chmess as there are
of chess (an infinity), and they are just as hard to discover. And that means
that if people actually did get involved in investigating the truths of
chmess, they would make mistakes, which would need to be corrected, and

=== p. 369 ===

this opens up a whole new field of a priori investigation, the higher-order
truths of chmess, such as the following:

1. Jones’s (1989) proof that p is a truth of chmess is flawed: he overlooks
  the following possibility. . . .
2. Smith’s (2002) claim that Jones’s (1989) proof is flawed presupposes the
  truth of Brown’s lemma (1975), which has recently been challenged by
  Garfinkle (2002). . . .
Now none of this is child’s play. In fact, one might be able to demonstrate
considerable brilliance in the group activity of working out the higher-order truths of chmess. Here is where psychologist Donald Hebb’s dictum
comes in handy:
         If it isn’t worth doing, it isn’t worth doing well.
Probably every philosopher can readily think of an ongoing controversy in
philosophy whose participants would be out of work if Hebb’s dictum were
ruthlessly applied, but we no doubt disagree on just which cottage
industries should be shut down. Probably there is no investigation in our
capacious discipline that is not believed by some school of thought to be a
wasted effort, brilliance squandered on taking in each other’s laundry.
Voting would not yield results worth heeding, and dictatorship would be
even worse, so let a thousand flowers bloom, I say. But just remember: if
you let a thousand flowers bloom, count on 995 of them to wilt. The alert I
want to offer you is just this: try to avoid committing your precious
formative years to a research agenda with a short shelf life. Philosophical
fads quickly go extinct, and there may be some truth to the rule of thumb:
the hotter the topic, the sooner it will burn out.
   One good test to make sure a philosophical project is not just exploring
the higher-order truths of chmess is to see if people aside from
philosophers actually play the game. Can anybody outside of academic
philosophy be made to care about whether Jones’s counterexample works
against Smith’s principle? Another such test is to try to teach the stuff to
uninitiated undergraduates. If they don’t “get it,” you really should
consider the hypothesis that you’re following a self-supporting community
of experts into an artifactual trap.
   Here is one way the trap works. Philosophy is to some extent an
unnatural act, and the more intelligent you are, the more qualms and

=== p. 370 ===

reservations you are likely to have about whether you get it, whether you’re
“doing it right,” whether you have any talent for this discipline, and even
whether the discipline is worth entering in the first place. So bright student
Jones is appropriately insecure about going into philosophy. Intrigued by
Professor Brown’s discussion, Jones takes a stab at it, writing a paper on
hot topic H that is given an “A” by Professor Brown. “You’ve got real
talent, Jones,” says Brown, and Jones has just discovered something that
might be suitable lifework. Jones begins to invest in learning the rules of
this particular game and in playing it ferociously with the other young
aspirants. “Hey, we’re good at this!” they say, egging each other on. Doubts
about the enabling assumptions of the enterprise tend to be muffled or
squelched “for the sake of argument.” Publications follow.
   So don’t count on the validation of your fellow graduate students or your
favorite professors to settle the issue. They all have a vested interest in
keeping the enterprise going. It’s what they know how to do; it’s what they
are good at. This is a problem in other fields too, and it can be even harder
to break out of. Experimentalists who master a technique and equip an
expensive lab for pursuing it sometimes get stuck filling in the blanks of
data matrices that nobody cares about any longer. What are they supposed
to do? Throw away all that expensive apparatus? It can be a nasty problem.
It is actually easier and cheaper for philosophers to retool. After all, our
“training” is not, in general, high-tech. It’s mainly a matter of learning our
way around in various literatures, learning the moves that have been tried
and tested. And here the trap to avoid is simply this: You see that somebody
eminent has asserted something untenable or dubious in print; Professor
Goofmaker’s clever but flawed piece is a sitting duck, just the right target
for an eye-catching debut publication. Go for it. You weigh in, along with a
dozen others, and now you must watch your step, because by the time
you’ve all cited each other and responded to the responses, you’re a
budding expert on how to deal with how to deal with responses to
Goofmaker’s minor overstatement. (And remember, too, that if Goofmaker
hadn’t made his thesis a little too bold, he never would have attracted all
the attention in the first place; the temptation to be provocative is not
restricted to graduate students on the lookout for a splashy entrance into the
field.)
   Some people are quite content to find a congenial group of smart people
with whom to share “the fun of discovery, the pleasures of cooperation, and

=== p. 371 ===

the satisfaction of reaching agreement,” as the philosopher John Austin
(1961, p. 123) once put it in a published lecture, without worrying about
whether the joint task is worth doing. And if enough people take up the
task, it eventually becomes a phenomenon in its own right, worth studying.
As philosopher Burton Dreben used to say to the graduate students at
Harvard, “Philosophy is garbage, but the history of garbage is scholarship.”
Some garbage is more important than other garbage, however, and it’s hard
to decide which of it is worthy of scholarship. In another lecture published
in the same book, Austin (1961) gave us the following snide masterpiece:
            It is not unusual for an audience at a lecture to include some who
            prefer things to be important, and to them now, in case there are
            any such present, there is owed a peroration. [p. 179]
Austin was a brilliant philosopher, but most of the very promising
philosophers who orbited around him, no doubt chuckling at this remark,
have vanished without a trace, their oh-so-clever work in ordinary
language philosophy (a school Austin more or less invented) duly
published and then utterly and deservedly ignored within a few years after
publication. It has happened many times.
   So what should you do? The tests I have mentioned—seeing if folks
outside philosophy, or bright undergraduates, can be made to care—provide
only warning signs; they are not definitive. Certainly there have been, and
will be, forbiddingly abstruse and difficult topics of philosophical
investigation well worth pursuing, in spite of the fact that the uninitiated
remain unimpressed. I certainly don’t want to discourage explorations that
defy the ambient presumptions about what is interesting and important. On
the contrary, the best bold strokes in the field will almost always be met by
stony incredulity or ridicule at first, and these should not deter you. My
point is that you should not settle complacently into a seat on the
bandwagon just because you have found some brilliant fellow travelers who
find your work on the issue as unignorable as you find theirs. You may all
be taking each other for a ride.

1 With regard to another puzzle in this book, for one thing, the slop I love is even followed by
Laura Dern, and for another, in spite of the smut, I hope to iron Sean Penn’s shirt.
2 A delicious chess hoax appeared on the Internet on April Fools’ Day, 2012 (“Rajlich: Busting
the King’s Gambit,” ChessBase News, April 2, 2012, http://chessbase.com/newsdetail.asp?
newsid=8047). It claimed that a gigantic consortium of computers working around the clock for
over four months had proved that the King’s Gambit (an opening long discredited but never

=== p. 372 ===

“disproved”) had now been shown definitively to be defeatable in all but one unlikely condition.
The hoax fooled me—which was particularly embarrassing since I had written about an earlier
hoax by Martin Gardner (in the introduction to Hurley, Dennett, and Adams, 2011). For the
explanation of how the hoax was created, see “The ChessBase April Fools Prank,” ChessBase
News, April 4, 2012, http://chessbase.com/newsdetail.asp?newsid=8051.

