=== chunk: cavell-1979-claim-of-reason/ch13b-feelings-and-confinement ===
title: Feelings, the Outsider, confinement and exposure
source_pdf: docs/sources/cavell-1979-claim-of-reason/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 435-463
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 408
plan_page_end: 436
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 408 ===

of "hearing" restricted to the human — I mean, roughly to my — range?
(What would count as his being hard of hearing, or deaf?) Isn't this all
virtuosity just for virtuosity's sake? It corrupts the craftsman's craft. Form
should picture function.
    How far can my subservience to the craftsman extend? Suppose I have
trained myself to think of the friend as having not feelings but "feelings".
(Cp. Hilary Putnam, "Robots: Machines or ... ?".) Which means that I
have trained myself to show him, for example, not sympathy but "sympathy"; and perhaps learned not to be impatient with him if I think he is
complaining too much — I mean of course "complaining" too much, and
"impatient" with him ("him"). Then one day, my back turned, the friend
grabs my arm ("grabs"?), wheels me around, and the craftsman approaches
me with his knife. "So," he says, "you have accommodated yourself to the
friend, have you? You have learned how to treat him. Your attitude towards him is your attitude towards a 'soul', is it? You hedge his soul, do
you?" Then he rips open my shirt and snaps off my chest to reveal (I
glance down) some elegant clockwork. You cannot imagine my surprise.
— Can I? I can imagine either of two conclusions the craftsman may wish
me to draw from this demonstration that I am not, for all I know, in any
 better position, soul-wise or body-wise, than the friend. One is: For all I
know, all I have are, for example, "pains". The other is: For all I know,
 the friend has, for example, pains.
    To accept the latter conclusion is to accept the friend as an other, a
 fellow sufferer, unhedged. In what would acceptance consist? The craftsman continues: "Does he have pain, is he subject to pain, or not? Decide!"
 But even with the knife pointed at me I cannot decide. Before, when the
 craftsman asked for my agreement, I was in a position to decide something, there was room for me to have a say, and there was the same room
 for the craftsman. But now I am being asked whether I do or do not
 share the life of suffering with this other, and at the same time I am shown
 that I do not know whether I am observing or leading that life. Has the
 craftsman given up his say, granted the friend autonomy? If he told me
 that he had, could I believe him? I understand him no better than I
 understand the friend. If what the craftsman says is that he has decided
 that the friend suffers, or decided to say so, then who is hedging?
    To settle upon the former conclusion — that for all I know all I have
 are "pains" — I would presumably have to give up the idea that I am,
  and know that I am, a human being. Could I conceive of myself as something less than a human, on a par with whatever it was I was conceiving
  the friend to be? If this is what I am, and I know it, then this is doubtless

=== p. 409 ===

               BETWEEN ACKNOWLEDGMENT AND AVOIDANCE                     ^09

my secret. Why did I not think that the friend might be harboring such
a secret? Perhaps because I did not think of him as a lapsed human. If
he has such a secret, he could never tell it to me, for I could understand
it no better than I can understand him: he is private to me.
   But this is ridiculous. He has no comparison at his disposal. Whatever
painish thing he has, he thinks of it as pain. Then how am I different?
Well, he may not have a painish thing at all, let alone think anything
about its status. Whereas I certainly have, and do. I feel for example,
abashed by the recent revelation concerning my body. And what 7 feel,
when I feel abashed, is what feeling abashed is. That is not a very persuasive definition. But I do not mean it to preclude others from feeling it
too. I just mean to assure myself that no one is in a better position to
know what feeling abashed or feeling pain is than I am.
   How would I know if another is in fact equally well placed? If I think
my feeling is somehow connected to this machinery and other stuff under
me, into whose works I happen to have fallen, then I might think that
the friend's feeling would similarly be connected to his stuff, if he had the
feeling. But of course I could not be sure. I am certain that my abashment
comes from this body — not because it causes it (though it may) but because it is its object, it is that in the face of which I am abashed. But
again the friend may not feel this way about his body; he may enjoy it, as
Thoreau did his set of false teeth. Any inference from his body to him
therefore amounts to a sheer guess. It is not that all I have to go on in
making this inference is just one case (mine); it is that I cannot use even
that case; I do not know if it enters in. (Of course what I know of myself
and take myself for enters utterly into what I can know of another and
take him for. Only the idea that the other is analogous to me fails to
bring out how I enter in.)
   Instead of settling for a guess, I may fix my attention on the body of
the other as upon his or her entrails and find myself transfixed with the
conviction that he or she is besouled. I have divined it; I have penetrated
the veil of the other by taking his body as an omen, in this case a good
omen, of a soul. If others credit my gift generally, I will be set up as a
seer and soothsayer. Regarding a seer and soothsayer as "the one who
knows" (i.e., sees and says) the state of another would be an intellectually
more coherent response to skeptical doubt than regarding the other as
the one who alone knows the state of himself. If the statement that the
other has what I have, i.e., has sentience, is a hypothesis, then it may have
either of two outcomes. If the one about whom the hypothesis is made is
the only one who knows the outcome, this is not only uncheckable, but

=== p. 410 ===

41O              SKEPTICISM AND THE PROBLEM OF OTHERS

depends upon a comparison of what the other knows with what I know,
and there could be nobody to make the comparison. Anyway he could not
and / could not.
   Here is a further alternative. I from time to time find that I have intuitions about the state of the friend. Usually I have an intuition of his pain
when his body is contorted, sometimes not. He cannot volunteer news of
his condition to me, because then I would have to believe him, and that I
cannot do. (Or will not do, because I regard such beliefs as superstitions:
they can never be checked.) Nor can he show me how it is with him,
because all he could do to show me, for example that he is in pain, would
be, for example, to contort his body, or point at it; and such things may
or may not produce my intuition of his pain. (If someone were such that
he constantly had intuitions about all the others he knew, he would go
mad. Only God could bear to be God. An understanding of the first commandment.) Suppose the friend and I prove to be mutually intuitive, with
a normally expected range of failures in our intuitions. The most plausible theory of ourselves would be that we are pure minds, unextended
beings. (It would be nonsense to imagine that we might be one another,
and hence "feel what the other feels". For I am characterized by nothing
but being the one I am; and the same goes for him.) The bodies associated
with each of us are enormously convenient to havfi; they make us visible
and audible to one another. Well, strictly speaking 7 (and of course he)
are not made visible and audible; but the bodies are necessary to prompt
the intuitions we have of one another. (We might have philosophical disputes about whether we are immortal, whether we could survive unas-sociated with a body, hence without the possibility of being intuited by our
own kind. But we may not be interested in the question. What happens
to us at the death of the body is what happens to the music when the
music concludes. There is a period of reverberation, and then nothing.)
   Suppose one day I notice that my feelings have become uniformly
associated with what is happening to my body, that, for example, I always
have a pain when my body contorts and never otherwise, or almost never;
or I may notice that my intuitions about the friend's pain come over me
only when his body contorts, almost never otherwise, and he almost
always confirms the intuition, i.e., I find I take his word. I may then no
longer regard the body as something with which I and he are each associated, something we each "have", but something we each of us have. The
most plausible theory about us now is that we are human beings. The
analogy between us is now excellent. I can check on his feelings by expressing my intuitions (for his confirmation or disconfirmation); and it

=== p. 411 ===

makes sense to check on the connection between his body and his feelings
because it makes sense to check on the connection between mine and
mine. One day it occurs to me that I no longer understand what it means
to check this. If I have a pain, there must be a cause; if I do not, where
I ought to have, then there must be a cause for that. Doubt about whether
I have a body is out of the question. Doubt about whether he has a body
is also out of the question, unless my intuitions about him cease. Then
I may think that to say I have a body does not go deep enough in expressing my connection with it. I would prefer to say that I am my body, even
though I am satisfied that I am not. I do not know that I am not my body,
as though I know that it is false to say that I am. It is rather that to say
so falsifies my convictions on the matter; my body is not what I take
myself to be. — That is because one does not take oneself to be anything. — Then what is the point of telling me what I am? It is, analogously, not false to say that I have a body, unless that suggests, for example, that I might not have one, as I might not have a left arm. If I say
that I necessarily have a body, I am leaving out my relation to this one.
And if I say I necessarily have this body, then I am not sure I believe it,
not at any rate as I believe that I do have this one.
   It may be that the sense of falsification comes from the way I understand the phrase "have a body". It is really a mythological way of saying
that I am flesh. But I am not satisfied with this myth, for it implies that
I also have something other than a body, call it a soul. Now I have three
things to put together: a body, a soul, and me. (So there are four things
to be placed: I plus those three.) But I no more have a soul than I have
a body. That is what I say here and now. People who say they have a
soul sometimes militantly take its possession as a point of pride, for
instance William Ernest Henley and G. B. Shaw. Take the phrase "have
a soul" as a mythological way of saying that I am spirit. If the body individuates flesh and spirit, singles me out, what does the soul do? It binds
me to others.

   I do not think, whenever I look upon, or think of, the naked human
body, "How right it is that the parts and features of the body are all just
where they are!". I may of course from time to time be struck by this fact.
I may also from time to time be struck not fay the Tightness but by the
dumb fortune, or irony, of certain placements of the parts and features of
the body, as Yeats was, for example, by love's having pitched its mansion
in the place of excrement. This anatomical fact is something Freud found

=== p. 412 ===

a natural, incorrigible limitation upon the purity or satisfaction of desire.
(It is a fact he emphasized from almost before the beginning. Cf. The
Origins of Psycho-Analysis, p. 147.) Certainly any changes I can dream
of in the arrangement strike me as quite insane. It is so human a fortune.
Not the fact of it is so human; the fact is shared by other animals. What
is so human is that we share the fact with other animals, that animals are
also our others. That we are animals. Being struck by this is something
one might call "seeing us as human". It is a feeling of wonder.
    Amazement was my response, my natural response, when I knew the
friend was an automaton. "I can't get over it", I kept wanting to exclaim.
The peculiar thrill in watching its routines never seems to fade. But if I
cannot get past my doubt that this friend is an automaton, and past holding the doubt in reserve, then I am not amazed, except the way I may be
amazed at the capacities of a human being, say at someone's stupidity or
 forbearance or skill. The craftsman lost his power over me when I saw
that his own powers had run out. Whatever test he can impose upon the
 friend to show its failure of humankindness — the placement of a micro-mechanism; a mismatch of emotional reaction; the fact that it can be
 starved for forty days without weight loss; its ability to run a four minute
 mile, mile after mile — any of this can be corrected (or hidden?) by a
 super-craftsman, perhaps by this craftsman next year, in the normal course
 of technological progress. Whatever can be specified, as a test of automa-tonity, can be built in to fail. Criteria come to an end.
    Would it make any difference now if we were testing for humanity? If
 I am inclined to believe that this humanish something is a human being,
 then any lack I can be prepared to find I must be prepared not to find.
 So this inclination either comes to nothing, or else it is to be settled
 empirically. But what if it does not get settled?
    It is true that we do not now in fact open up putative human beings
 to find out if they are genuinely human, I mean human beings. And
 couldn't it be true, as a further matter of fact, that some of them are not
 beings, but automata? My argument against opening any of them up is
 as follows: Either the proportion of automata among putative humans is
 roughly half or else it is smaller or greater than half. If it is roughly half,
  then in opening one of them up we run roughly a fifty-fifty risk of killing
 someone, anyway of subjecting him to something our relationship will
  not survive; if the proportion is smaller, the risk is higher but the stakes
  are lower — I can absorb a certain degree of error; if the proportion is
  greater, the risk is lower but the stakes are higher — the fewer the real
 human beings the more precious they are. If only I can just discover which

=== p. 413 ===

ones they arel Or if only someone could tell me what the exact proportion
isl The thing to do, accordingly, is to become very cautious whom you
take up with, and to devise ever subtler forms of test. In such a world the
advice of a Polonius would be unanswerable.
    But can I take it that as a matter of fact some proportion of the population is made up of automata? Isn't this counter to my stories which suggested that, as I would like to put it, my attitude toward an automaton
(or toward the discovery of automatonity) is one of amazement? — Not
necessarily. To take the presence of automata as a fact is to be prepared
for amazement. — But that is the problem. If I am prepared, at any and
all times, for amazement, then at any and all times I am not prepared
for humanity. My attitude toward no one is my attitude toward a soul.
— So the possibility, which I cannot, or ought not, rule out, that some
human somethings are not human beings, is enough to seal out humanity
for me altogether? But why should not an enlightened Polonius accuse
me of faintheartedness? His advice is: Treat every putative human as a
human being. Conquer your preparation for amazement. Get their human
aspect to dawn on you, so that you see them as humans. Treat humankind,
anyway humanlikeness, always as an end never merely as a means. Polo-nius calls this, and similar things, his Sterling Rule.
    Why is this advice chilling? It isn't that I could not live down to it. But
it is the advice I would expect of a perfected automaton. — Suppose I
do conquer my preparation for amazement. Nevertheless I still worry that
some I count among humankind are not human beings. And now I am
not satisfied to say that this means that these non-beings or non-human
beings may exhibit feelings without actually having feelings, because this
is true of the human beings among humankind. And I have already conceded that the doubtfully human among them have feelings, or rather
"have" "feelings". I would rather say that in the case of the non-humans
 there is no difference between the exhibiting and the having. To suppose
 that the non-humans may have feelings that they do not exhibit (and do
 not suppress the exhibition of, which would simply be a special case of
exhibition) is mere mystification. Of course the exhibiting of suppression
 may be hidden from me since it may go on entirely inside. (I am, for
simplicity, just assuming that nothing counts as giving the non-humans
 an analgesic.) Having/exhibiting feelings is, for them, on a par with
drinking, showing their thirst being quenched, urinating, . . . Do they
 (only) "drink" or do they (really) drink? Whatever they do they do, there
 is no quarrelling with them (unless they happen to have "quarrelling" in
 their repertoire). One who studies them to find out what they do is not

=== p. 414 ===

a behaviorist, unless one who studies the behavior of the stock market,
and one who studies the behavior of metals under extreme temperatures,
are behaviorists. If I could find that one among the non-humans showed
an obsession with the problem of other minds — I mean other automata,
or other zombies . . . — then I might study it in order to learn whether
it could survive certain versions of skepticism, or grief.
    My strolls in the craftsman's garden tended to show that I cannot accept
something as "like" a human being and at the same time regard the thing
as lacking in an essential feature of the human being, call it sentience.
Or, that to the extent that I regard something as analogous to me, I regard
that thing as having (something analogous to my) sentience. To have a
"body" like mine, or to "have" a body as I have one, is to be subjected
 to it, to be the subject of it. If what I had wanted to show is that a
machine can have sentience, then I need not have cast my Outsider as a
 craftsman at all. We would have just begun with the (perfected) human
body. It can be taken as a machine, seen so. And within the vision of the
 human body as a machine, a machine can feel. (". . . It can be conscious
or unconscious; it sees, is blind; . . . " A machine has nothing special to
 do with pain. Build me one that can scan, peer, stare, glance. . . .) But
 to take the human body as a machine is as much, or little, a vision of
 humanity as the vision that takes the body to be inhabited by something
 else. (What has the schizophrenic learned about us?)
    — But surely even within the vision of the human body as a machine,
 it is not a machine the way a machine is a machine? —Does this mean
 that a machine cannot, for example, peer or glance or stare? And is this
a definition? A stipulation? It is presumably not an empirical discovery —
 as though the having of some region of sentience has been found to be
 beyond the machine's capacities; as though piling sentience on top of its
 other functions somehow overloads it. — A machine that is truly a
 machine does not have sentience. — But a human being just does? And
 is this a definition? It seems equally far from an empirical discovery.
 — This is a familiar impasse. We should not have accepted the vision of
 a machine's having a region of sentience in the first place, because: "If
 the human body is a machine then a machine has sentience" is no better
 an inference than "If the human body is a machine then the body does
 not have sentience". — But all I wanted to say is that it is no worse an
  inference, that the issue of other minds is not settled by whether or not
 we take the human body as a machine. — But it is not an inference at
  all. It is the result of absent logic. Like: "If I were a frog then I would

=== p. 415 ===

like eating flies" and "If a frog were me then some frog would not like
eating flies."
   Picking up Bergson's idea of the comic as the encrusting or the obtruding of the mechanical or material onto or out of the living, we might
conceive of laughter as the natural response to automatonity when we
know the other to be human. This takes laughter as some reverse of
amazement. In that case it would follow from the absence of our laughter
in the face of the impression or imagination of automatonity in others
that we do not know others to be human. — Further paths beckon from
here. We might follow out an idea that the form I have given skepticism
is, according to these recent reflections, a comic one: natural, inescapable
progressions of argument are shown to be encrusted with unnatural, inevitable origins. (The comic crescendo of Sailings of one about to slip on
 a field of ice are the antics precisely of one for whom walking and running
and dancing are in his natural repertory, and who is using just that repertory, there is no other, to try to regain his balance and find his footing.)
That we do not laugh at our philosophical Sailings may go to show how
 high the seas of pedantry run. For whom are we supposed to pick out to
laugh at? (This path must eventually cross the path of philosophical
 irony.) And we should sometime follow out the cause of laughter inherent
 in the procedures of ordinary language philosophy, a cause exemplified
 amply, and differently, in Austin and in Wittgenstein. For example, my
 treatment of the interlocutor's "But there is something there all the same
 accompanying my cry of pain" was, I hope evidently, intended to bring
 out the comedy as well as the madness of it. And thereby to suggest that
 the perception of the comedy is essential to, is the same as, the detection
 of the madness. You could say that laughter in these matters is the touchstone of the unnatural, where unnatural is the opposite of that naturalness
 in language the ordinary language philosopher reckons with. (The opposite is not, e.g., the artificial, as champions of artificial languages (used to?)
 suppose. Cf. "Must We Mean What We Say?", p. 42.) I do not so much
 wish to say that the absence of laughter is a good sign of the presence of
 the natural (the absence may result from a corrupted sensibility) as that
 the natural is what, at best, laughter is able to perceive and to achieve.
 (Think of it as functioning, as in tuning a violin, like throwing a string
 crudely below pitch in order to magnify, to make perceptible, the exact
 coincidence of its finding its point a perfect fifth from its neighbor (as
 you twist the peg home).) The idea of the natural here is not at odds with,
 but rather meets, the idea of the sociable. This meeting of the natural

=== p. 416 ===

and the sociable is something comic writers preach, knowing also, something that writers of tragedy see, that the human being is apt, is fit, to
be neither.

   What is the nature of the worry, if it is a real one, that there may at any
human place be things that one cannot tell from human beings? Is it a
blow to one's intellectual pride, as in the case of skepticism about the existence of material objects? Or is it an embarrassment of one's humanity?
    What would this embarrassment be? — Obviously, that I will, for example, call forth pity, from myself or from the other, when that other is
not a human being. — But this would be an embarrassment only if
someone knew, better than I, the facts of the case. And could anyone?
Could anyone be in a better position for knowing than I am? I have already ruled out the craftsman for such a role; he cannot see to the end
of his work. Here I feel: One who knows better than I would have to be
free of human nature. God, for example. But if God is in question, then
why the embarrassment? The spectacle of my comforting and being comforted by a non-being might just make God tenderer; he might grant it
human life. If I am imagining laughter and scorn in response to the
spectacle, then I have an idea not of God but of an Evil Demon, or rather
of God as an Evil Demon.
    Can a human being be free of human nature? (The doctrine of Original
Sin can be taken as a reminder that, with one or rather with two exceptions humankind cannot be thus free. Yet Saint Paul asks us to put off
 our (old) nature. What is repellent in Christianity is the way it seems to
imagine both our necessary bondage to human nature and our possible
 freedom from it. In this, Nietzsche seems to me right, even less crazy than
 Christianity. But he persists in believing both that humankind must get
 free of human nature and that the human being cannot be free of human
 nature. Hence the logic of his advice to escape this dilemma of our humanity by overcoming our human nature. I hope he was wrong in this
 persistence, even though his prediction seems accurately enough to be
 coming true, that v,T* will, apart from his advice, overcome ourselves
 nihilistically, solve the dilemma of our humanity by becoming monsters.)
    If I try to imagine just some unspecified Outsider, what can he tell me?
 He is a poor relation of the Outsider we fantasize in thinking of the related moment in the skeptical problem of the external world. There, for
 example, we have criticized Locke for saying that ideas are "copies" of
  things: if all we can ever have in our heads are "ideas", then of course we

=== p. 417 ===

                BETWEEN ACKNOWLEDGMENT AND AVOIDANCE                     41*7

cannot brush ideas aside, or stand, as it were, orthogonally to them, and
thus be able to compare them with the things they are "of"; there may
just be no such things at all, for all we know. On this picture it seems easy,
perhaps inevitable, to imagine that though we cannot be beyond our
ideas, an Outsider could be, would be. And if we then knew what we
imagine the powers of the Outsider to be, we might learn something of
what we imagine human knowledge to be, in particular what we imagine
the nature of "the senses" to be. The same goes for determining whether
we may now be dreaming. Convinced that we cannot determine it, I am
convinced that an Outsider could, must. (I am half speaking as an Outsider in so much as imagining our predicament.) But the case of the Outsider with respect to me and other minds is another matter. What I have
to imagine him to know is not merely whether a given other is a being or
not, but to know something I do not know about how to tell, about what
the difference is between human beings and non-human beings or human
non-beings. I do not expect the Outsider with respect to me and the external world to know something I do not know about the difference between sleeping and waking, or about whether one thing is a copy of another.
    How might I conceive of an Outsider to me and other minds? He may
or may not see a difference among all the occupants of human places. If
he tells me that he does not, and I believe him, would I be convinced that
my worries can come to an end, that there are no human places occupied
 by things other than humans? It depends on what he thinks the occupants
 are. He may think there is no difference among the occupants because he
regards them all as automata, or androids, or apes. Or he may think that
there is a difference, but the difference turns on their excellence as auto-mata, or androids, or apes. (These are my translations of what he may
have in mind. Really to characterize him, my words will require an ana-gogic interpretation.) One strain among them is so special that he sets
 them apart, as if for study. He is positively fascinated by them. Suppose
 it turns out that these are roughly the ones I am inclined to say are humans; his sorting is roughly extensionally equivalent to mine. Is this reassuring? — But now everything depends on how he sorts me, what he
 thinks I am. And that is not the question I imagined myself to invoke him
 in order to answer. With that question, my interest in the status of others
vanishes. There is only me and the Outsider.
    But if the coherence in imagining the Outsider with respect to me and
 the external world turns on his being invoked just to tell an antecedently
 clear difference or to make an antecedently clear comparison, then sup-

=== p. 418 ===

pose I invoke an Outsider with respect to me and other minds just to
make a comparison between, say, what I feel when I say I feel pain and
what others feel when they say so, and between what I see when I say I
see red and what others see when they say so. A difference emerges in
these two cases. If the Outsider discovers that what we see when we each
say we see red is not the same, then it seems to make sense to ask which of
us is right. I can tolerate the idea that the other might be right because I
can tolerate the idea that neither of us is. But if I and the other do not
feel the same when we sincerely exhibit pain, I cannot tolerate the idea
that the other might be right and I not. What I feel, when I feel pain, is
pain. So I am putting a restriction on what the Outsider can know. He
can know something about another's pain that I cannot know, but not
something about mine. He is not really an Outsider to me. If he exists,
he is in me.

   The role of Outsider might be played, say in a horror movie, by a dog,
mankind's best friend. Then the dog allegorizes the escape from human
nature (required in order to know of the existence of others) in such a
way that we see the requirement is not necessarily for greater (superhuman) intelligence. The dog sniffs something, a difference, something is
in the air. And it is important that we do not regard the dog as honest;
merely as without decision in the matter. He is obeying his nature, as he
always does, must. (I can envy him this; it is only human to.) I do not expect that horror movies really cause horror, but, at best, "horror". But I
also do not know that I know the difference. I do not suppose that what
I have, when I am horrified, is horror; it may only be "horror". — What
is the object of horror? At what do we tremble in this way? Fear is of
danger; terror is of violence, of the violence I might do or that might be
done me. I can be terrified of thunder, but not horrified by it. And isn't
it the case that not the human horrifies me, but the inhuman, the monstrous? Very well. But only what is human can be inhuman. — Can only
the human be monstrous? If something is monstrous, and we do not believe that there are monsters, then only the human is a candidate for the
monstrous.
   If only humans feel horror (if the capacity to feel horror is a development of the specifically human biological inheritance), then maybe it is a
 response specifically to being human. To what, specifically, about being
human? Horror is the title I am giving to the perception of the precariousness of human identity, to the perception that it may be lost or in-

=== p. 419 ===

vaded, that we may be, or may become, something other than we are, or
take ourselves for; that our origins as human beings need accounting for,
and are unaccountable. (One way of accounting for the capacity for horror would be to find that the idea, or surmise, that human beings have
evolved from lower life is an ancient surmise, together with the perception that this evolution was absolutely contingent, hence unassured;
which means that some who occupy human places may not have made it
to the human status, and that some may fall back to an earlier stage. If
horror is (also) the reaction to the violation of taboo, say at the fact of incest or of cannibalism, then we must think of the connection between the
biological capacity and the social necessity. It suggests itself that these social violations have the force of casting the offender not merely out of this
society but outside the human race altogether, as though violation is not
of our laws alone, which define our social order, but of the laws that allow human society to exist at all; that, so to speak, raise human relations
from an existence in nature. It may be that the violation, if survived and
expiated, removes the offender from human nature upward, allows his
pure spiritualization rather than his pure corporealization, or rather ani-malization; as presumably in the case, say, of Oedipus; allows the choosing of the other of the two natures of the human, the unique and precarious combination of which creates the problem.)
   When the development of reason started producing explanations for
 the occurrence of religion, say as motivated by fear, then it was comparatively easy to imagine that the human race would one day overcome this
fear, as if it were a product of the childishness of the race. But suppose
that what motivates religion is (also) horror, a response not to the powers
and uncertainties of nature but to the powers and uncertainties of others
not wholly unlike oneself, so that the promise of religion is not the main-tainance of one's existence but the survival of one's intactness. A source of
evidence for this might appear in a reconsideration of the response to
classical tragedy. We are more or less accustomed to think of this response
as made up of pity and terror, as if what we witness is the subjection of
 the human being to states of violence, to one's own and to others; for example, terror at the causes and consequences of human rage, jealousy,
ambition, pride, self-ignorance. . . . But suppose that there is a mode of
 tragedy in which what we witness is the subjection of the human being to
 states of violation, a perception that not merely human law but human
nature itself can be abrogated. The outcast is a figure of pity and horror;
different from ourselves, and not different. The particular mysteriousness
in Hamlet's motivation may be our persisting in looking through his

=== p. 420 ===

events for an object of terror. We should try looking at him as a figure
of horror to himself.
   When the Outsider was unrestricted in what he could reveal to me
about myself (when my status as a human being was open to him to pass
upon), he was too outside. When he is restricted in what he can reveal
(when I determine what is and is not open to him to pass upon), he is not
outside enough. — So doesn't this dilemma show that there was no intelligible worry about some unspecifiable "difference" between human beings and non-beings? The worry again comes to nothing. — It suggests,
it seems to me, that if there is a worry it is not a skeptical worry, not
something beyond the field of everyday life.

   The little apparent dilemma about the outsideness of the Outsider itself outlines a procedure for pressing its suggestion further. Recognizing
that the figure of the Outsider is prompted naturally, even inevitably, in
the Cartesian format in which I have cast the recital of skeptical doubt,
let us go back to the idea of such a recital with an eye toward isolating
features of it that may help to account for a failure to convince oneself
that skepticism with respect to others is, or can be, produced along the
lines that produced skepticism with respect to the external world.
   Let us set up a context for knowing others that has at least the realism
of the skeptic's context for knowing material objects, and one that attempts to incorporate at least certain features of the skeptic's "best case"
for knowing objects, a feature we take to be essential to the skeptical result. We were not satisfied that we had such a case at our disposal when
 the topic came up in our initial attempt to thematize the reasonableness
of the skeptic's considerations (Chapter VI, the concluding section, entitled "A Further Problem"). And let us, further, incorporate the feature
of the recital in which we confront the object in question, and the feature
of our announcing this confrontation publicly. (These last two features
 come up insistently in Moore's demonstration with the envelope held up
 for all to see. They are notably absent from Descartes's meditation while
 in his dressing gown, seated before his fire, in which he is alone and in
 which, as befits the influence of a private fire, he is already in semi-reverie.) It might proceed as follows.
    "Among the things we claim to know the existence of, some are human
 beings (and other creatures, but we can omit them for convenience). And
 we claim to know very particular things about particular human beings,
 for example that they are in pain or angry. Each of you here in this room

=== p. 421 ===

would certainly say you know that there are now other human beings in
this room with you. [It would be possible here to raise the question "But
what do you really know?", thus prompting a general appeal to the senses,
which will, as in the case of material objects, fail. But this question, raised
at this point, is likely to fragment the group, since it is not necessarily the
case that all anyone now knows about any other is something he or she
can here and now divine, i.e., sense. This at a minimum assumes that the
members of the group are all strangers. To impose this condition on this
story would seem arbitrary, not to say prejudicial on behalf of the argument. At any rate, let us for the moment consider a different line of
continuation.]
   "And I, for one, am prepared to say I know that no one of you — you,
for instance — is now in excruciating pain. But how do I know this? For
all I know, you may be. But if I imagine that you are in excruciating pain
then naturally I must imagine that you are keeping it from me, suppressing its manifestations. If you are successful in this, then everything would
seem to me just as it does now, that you are calm, and attentive to what I
am saying (or, of course, perhaps bored by it and keeping that from me
[pause for laughter]). But to be able to imagine that you are in excruciating pain only if you are keeping it from me is to imagine that even
though / do not know of your pain, you certainly know. And this is to
imagine, or rather assume, that you have sentience, or rather consciousness, or rather self-consciousness, as I have; that you are, as I am, a human
being; that I have correctly identified you as a human being. What justifies this assumption? I do not impose an analogous assumption in claiming to know of the existence and qualities of tables and chairs and bits or
cliffs of chalk, an assumption that if I am right in claiming them to exist
then I am right in my identification of them as material (vs. immaterial);
or rather this assumption plays a different role with respect to material
objects (a point to which I shall recur in a moment). With material objects, all I claim, or assume, is that I see them, see them. It is the most
natural assumption in the world. So where does the assumption come
from according to which I must have correctly identified you as a human
being? From some such fact as that my identification of you as a human
being is not merely an identification of you but with you. This is something more than merely seeing you. Call it empathic projection. (At a
comparable moment in recitals concerning material objects we find philosophers needing to characterize something less than seeing, anyway less
than seeing an object, since even if there is no object present there is
something indubitably visible. Some will then name a new object of

=== p. 422 ===

sight, say sense-data; others will then say that there are two senses of 'see'.
Empathic projection is at least as well defined an idea as these.)
   "Now: Couldn't I be wrong? Not wrong merely in the way I can be
wrong about claiming to know that there are objects on the basis of
sensing them (i.e., wrong because I am dreaming or hallucinating them,
which of course could happen with 'others' as well, say with Banquo), but
wrong in a special way. I could be empathically projecting and there be
nothing (of the right kind) empathically to project with, or rather upon.
You might, for all I know, be a mutation, or a perfected automaton, or an
android, or a golem, or some other species of alien. To recur to a point I
left a moment ago, if I find that for all I know some material object may
be other than it seems to be (say a counterfeit of the real thing), I do not
thereupon suppose that I can never, in other circumstances, find that out.
But how could I ever find out that you are not an automaton or an android, etc., a counterfeit human being? [Here we will perhaps want a walk
or two with the craftsman in his garden, to get rid of the idea that looking
inside will settle the matter.] I do not of course say that there are human-ish things other than human beings, much less say that you are one. But
is it irrational to imagine that there are, and that you are one, and to
imagine this here and now, in the presence of my own empathic projection, which is the ultimate basis for knowing of your existence as a human being, a fellow being, and in circumstances as good as any I can be
in, one in which I am confronting you?"
   If I have made this recital, if academic, sufficiently accurate and forceful, then I would not have to accept the reply: "Of course it is irrational
to believe, or even to imagine, that there are human non-beings! It is a
paradigm case of irrationality; it is positively medieval! You might as well
doubt that witch trials were the product of irrationality!" By "not having
to accept this reply" I mean only that I would not have to accept it, or
something like it, as conclusive. I might ask how it is that we have recovered from such outbreaks of irrationality, which dot the religious history, i.e., the history, of the Judeo-Christian world. Has it happened
through the advent of modern science? But this only means that the scientifically-minded do not consider (I do not say that they fail to consider)
 that there may be such human non-beings. There is no room for such
things in the new world-picture. (The very modern-minded among us
might newly consider that there are such things — not, perhaps, witches,
but aliens of another kidney. The advent of science may, in certain cases,
have merely provided new shapes for irrationality. But such persons
among us will doubtless newly consider, as well, and enjoy the fact, that

=== p. 423 ===

we may at any and all times be hallucinating or dreaming.) — And this
is enough for my purposes. For it is as much as to say: My imagining you
to be something other than a human being is as irrational (has the same
irrationality) as my imagining that there are such things for you to be; I
am as convinced that you are a human being as I am that there is nothing
else for you to be; the one is as certain as the other. But it seems to me
part of my common sense of the matter that, if I know you for a human
being, I must be far more certain of that fact than I am of the fact that
there is nothing else for you to be. I had not dreamt that my conviction
in your existence depended upon my being scientifically-minded, or anyway enlightened. Did people not know of the existence of others until the
advent of science —even people who believed that some others were
witches or werewolves? (Science is no better or worse a justification for
my conviction in the existence of objects. For if I rely on science to tell
me whether there are tables and chairs and bits or cliffs of chalk, then I
must expect it to inform me that there are not, not really.)
   Then what is the moral of the recital? On the one hand it seems to me
that something of the sort recited must be true; not perhaps that there
just may be other things for you to be, but that my taking you for, seeing
you as, human depends upon nothing more than my capacity for something like empathic projection, and that if this is true then I must settle
upon the validity of my projection from within my present condition,
from within, so to speak, my confinement from you. For there would be
no way for me to step outside my projections. On the other hand I feel
that the other, some other, can still tell me of, or show me, his or her existence; that he or she will be able to step outside their confinement from
me. For the others in the room did not vanish in relevance upon my realizing that the one whom I had singled out for my attention could not be
known for a human being apart from my empathic projection, as the rest
of the objects in my visual field vanish in relevance upon my realizing
that I do not see the object I have singled out for my attention, hence do
not know its existence, if I am dreaming or hallucinating. I do not, that
is to say, know whether to take it that I can never be certain of the existence of others on the basis of my empathic projection with them, or not
so to take it.
   Maybe the recital has not yet reached its conclusion. Take this continuation: "Obviously you can never be certain that other human beings exist,
for any one you single out may, for all you know, be something other than
you imagine, perhaps a human, probably a human if you like, but possibly a mutation, and just possibly an automaton, a zombie, an android, an

=== p. 424 ===

angel, an alien of some unheard of kidney. The world is what it is. And
whatever it is, so far as you take it as inhabited by candidates for the human, you are empathically projecting. This means that you cannot rule
out the non-human (or human non-being) possibility. It no more makes
sense to suppose that in certain cases the projection may, as it were, be
veridical, or justified, than it would make sense to suppose, if you are
dreaming or hallucinating, that in certain cases the dream or hallucination is veridical, or justified, on the ground that when you see or would
say (loosely) that you see, or seem to see, a roundish ruddy-looking somewhat, a real apple just may be just there. The speculation is empty. There
is no there for you, where objects are. There are no individual exits from
the world of objects into your dream. There are no individual marks or
features by virtue of which you can pick out the real from the unreal. Criteria come to an end. Hallucination and dreaming happen all at once,
seamlessly; they are world-creating, hence they are world-depriving. So is
the empathic projection of otherness."
    I find that I do not accept this idea of the seamlessness of projection.
But why not, since whether I accept the (independent; non-projected)
existence of other minds seems more deeply up to me, to my attitudes and
sensibility, than whether I accept the (independent; non-hallucinated) existence of material objects? What is the worst that befalls me should it be
the case that material objects do not exist? I suffer a generalized trompe
 I'oeil, and of course trompe I'oreille as well, and so on; my senses (and
what they sense?) cheat me (naturally cheat me) into taking it that there
 are things where there are only interpreted sensings. It is a biological demand. But if there are no other human beings, then what befalls me is a
 generalized and massive trompe I'ame; my soul (and what it wishes?)
 cheats me (supernaturally cheats me) into taking it that it has company.
 It is a spiritual demand. And couldn't the demand go unmet?
    If it can, the skeptical recital has, so far at least, not shown that it can,
 or how it can, nor what the nature of the demand is. There is, that is to
 say, a good reason for my not simply sensing or realizing, upon the recital,
 that its moral is that I can never know. The reason is, partly, that, even
 granting something warranting the title of empathic projection, the recital
 has given no alternative to this feat of human cognition. It came up as
 simply the way in which, or the basis upon which, I do in fact know of
 the existence of others. There is so far no reason to doubt that I am, at
 all or most times, (correctly) projecting empathically, if that is to say, I
 have acquired the feat. All that has been suggested is that I may sometimes be wrong in the object it singles out. Well and good; I am often

=== p. 425 ===

wrong; often I cannot find out that I am wrong; this is simple enough.
Empathic projection is to other minds what seeing is to material objects,
not what dreaming is. —Why doesn't the absence of an alternative to
projection simply make matters worse, more hopelessly skeptical? Because
now it is simply more obvious that there is no way of telling the difference between, as it were, seeing human beings and dreaming their presence. — No. What has come out is that "seeing" others as human beings
is as much like dreaming them as it is like seeing them.
   Why does the seamlessness of projection fail to bear up in the recent
recital of skepticism? Because the world would not be projectively indistinguishable from the way it now is if I stopped projecting, or lost the
feat — as the world would be sensuously indistinguishable from the way
it is if I started dreaming or hallucinating what I now sense, a feature essential to the role of these possibilities in skepticism. If I stopped projecting, I would no longer take anything to be human, or rather I would see
no radical difference between humans and other things. I am, after all,
very selective about this already. Only a small proportion of the things I
see, or sense, do I regard as human (or animated, or embodied). Projection
already puts a seam in human experience; some things are on one side of
the seam, some on the other. On this picture, the presence of mutants,
 automata, zombies, androids, etc., would mean that I am almost certainly
sometimes projecting humanness where it is inappropriate; certainly it
would mean that I can not be certain that I never am. But would this
cause me to wonder whether I am ever right to project? The fact (so far
 at least) is that I do not doubt, anyway that I am not prey to skeptical
doubt. The others do not vanish when a given case fails me. My experience continues to affix its seam.

  Are we, therefore, in a position to conclude that there is no skepticism
with respect to other minds? Hardly that. My composing of the skeptic's
recent recital about other minds was designed to test at most whether a
skepticism concerning other minds, produced along the lines of the skepticism I produced concerning material objects, would be as reasonable, or
realistic, as I found that earlier skepticism, so produced, to be. So the
question is whether we are in a position to conclude that skepticism concerning other minds, so produced, fails to be as reasonable; that is to say,
fails so to be produced.
   We are still a step, or just a step, away from that conclusion. We can
conclude — I think we must — that we have so far not uncovered a best

=== p. 426 ===

4«6              SKEPTICISM AND THE PROBLEM OF OTHERS

case, that the skeptic's recent recital has so far not uncovered it. But we
cannot conclude that there is no such case (hence no skepticism); nor can
we conclude that the failure of the skeptic's recital to uncover it is not
due to some feature of his context that we have left unattended, or undeveloped.
   Can there be such a case? It seems that, on one cloaking of the problem
of other minds, the skeptical conclusion itself states that I cannot be in
the best position for knowing such a mind: only the other can know. And
if the other knows, then surely the other exists! — This seems a limited
version of skepticism, or a version of limited skepticism. Its moral seems
to be that skepticism with respect to other minds cannot be skeptical
enough. Is this philosophically reassuring? Has it mastered the worst that
can befall me? Skepticism in this form will not distinguish between cases
in which there is someone there who knows (there is an other) and cases
in which there is not; between cases in which some response is simulated
and cases in which what is simulated is the human, or the creaturely, as
such. But isn't this really up to the individual philosophy, to our differing
views of the situation, as it is up to the individual philosophy to determine the nature of the objects I (have discovered that I) cannot directly
be in touch with? Skepticism has done its work: it has shown that / cannot know, and that my position is the best. The best, that is, saving the
other's.
   Which other? Am I to realize that no other (other than the one in question) could be in a better position than I for knowing the one in question;
or that no other would be a better test of my knowledge; or both together — that no other can be in a better position, or have a better instance, for knowing any other, than I am, and have, with respect to this
other? I suggested, in speaking just now of a "limited skepticism" —one
which states that we can never be skeptical enough — that the other in
question may or may not vanish, depending upon some philosophical
point of view, or thesis. But even if, at the extreme, he does vanish, even
if there is just nothing there of the right kind to call a human being, this
is a disappearance only to me, not to all others; and it is a disappearance
 at best only of him, that one. (This would not be his dematerialization
but rather his materialization: he is wholly a body.) The case, for some
reason, fails to generalize, or spread of its own accord; or rather it generalizes into thin air. Why is this? Where did this case of the other come
 from?
    In composing the skeptical recital, I did find it natural for the skeptic
 to wish to single out one other to exemplify the situation in which he,

=== p. 427 ===

and by implication all of us, found himself. There was nothing special
about this other that led the skeptic to single him out, nothing prejudicial
it brought to the recital, was there? It was intended as analogous to the
epistemologist's use of a generic object as the sort of example with which
he is compelled to work, in order to speak of our capacity for knowing as
such. I said early on that the rubric "generic object" was meant heuristically, for example to rule out the investigator's expertise in the case. It
is a case, if there is a case, in which what is at stake is not the investigator's
particular learning but his human capacity as a knower, a case in which
anyone who has the power of knowledge can exercise that power. So if
something is special about the one singled out, it must consist in the very
way in which there is nothing special about him; in the fact, that is to
say, that he is a stranger. Is this, in itself, special? Surely, at least, the
stranger presents a more fundamental instance of our powers as knowers
of others than instances of our friends and acquaintances, who will merely
raise questions of our priviledged position with respect to them, not of
our general human capacities with respect to others?
   I do not think that the skeptical recital has given us, or yet given us, a
perspective from which to assess this feature of its progress. Doubtless the
fact that the one singled out is a stranger is what provides whatever initial
rationality there is in the supposition that the other might be other than
human. (And the image of the stranger is as primitive an issue for our assessment of our humanity as the image of the soul as breath.) But if the
skeptical recital has not, so far at least, convinced us that it has, or has
not, produced a best case for knowing of others, it has at least directed
us to something significant in our search for a best case. Intuitions of skepticism with respect to the external world and with respect to other minds
have been parallel, or predictably inverse, over much of their lives, as we
have traced them. With respect to the external world, I cannot get outside
my circle of experiences to compare them with the reality, if any, they
represent; my senses come between reality and my experience of reality.
With respect to other minds, I cannot get inside the other's circle of experiences, to compare with them the reality, if any, represented by what I
experience of him; his body comes between the reality of the other and
my experience of that reality. But the recent skeptical recital, in its feature of singling out the other, seems to have marked a boundary at which
my intuitions of the different skepticisms part company. For the body of
the other seals me out, and the other in, in each case. Is this intuition accurate? Is it significant?
   Go back to my inability, or reluctance, to draw a skeptical moral from

=== p. 428 ===

the skeptical recital concerning other minds. I felt that while it might be
true that I could never step outside my confinement from the other, it
was not true, or I did not know, that the other could not step outside his
confinement from me. What, if anything, does this mean? Is a genuine
difference being expressed here? And now it seems to me that I inaccurately, or partially, drew the moral from the recital; or rather inaccurately, or partially, sketched my inability, or reluctance, to draw a moral.
And the recital itself led me to this inaccuracy or partiality. What I said,
in effect, in accounting for my inability, or reluctance, was that I did not
know whether or not, so to speak, to come to the conclusion that I can
never know of the existence of others on the basis of empathic projection
alone. But what I now wish to say is that I do not know whether empathic
projection is, or is not, a sufficient basis for acknowledging the other's existence. There is, so far as I can tell, a dual cause for this wish to express
this stage of the matter in terms of acknowledgment. The term captures
at once the sense of the sense it makes to say that I of course cannot step
outside my empathic projection, that nothing could be better than this
 feat of cognition, and that I ought to be able to settle its validity from
 within my confinement from others; and also the sense of the sense it
makes to feel that the question is open whether others can step outside
 their confinement from me.
    What I have called my "wish" to express this "dual cause" in terms of
 acknowledgment is no doubt prompted by what I have seen of this concept in the essays of mine mentioned earlier in this chapter. In "Knowing
 and Acknowledging" I said that acknowledgment "goes beyond" knowledge, not in the order, or as a feat, of cognition, but in the call upon me
 to express the knowledge at its core, to recognize what I know, to do
 something in the light of it, apart from which this knowledge remains without expression, hence perhaps without possession. To avoid acknowledgment by refusing this call upon me would create "the sense of the sense it
 makes to say that I cannot step outside" ("go beyond") my feat of cognition. In "The Avoidance of Love" I said that acknowledgment of another
 calls for recognition of the other's specific relation to oneself, and that this
 entails the revelation of oneself as having denied or distorted that relation.
 King Lear figures this denial in images of blindness and banishment. To
  avoid acknowledgment by refusing the call upon me to recognize this relation and my denial of it would create "the sense of the sense it makes to
  feel the question is open whether others can step outside their confinement
  from me" (which may be my interpretation of my banishment of them).
     But while such results, if true, would illustrate or prompt my use of the

=== p. 429 ===

concept of acknowledgment in attempting to trace out the intuitions arising from the skeptic's recital, they would not justify my use of it there.
For in the case of, for example, "acknowledging another's pain", I know
in a general way what I am called upon to do that goes beyond my feat of
cognition, viz., to express sympathy, or impatience, something that incorporates his suffering. And in the case of Lear, I know in a general way
what he has to reveal about himself in order to acknowledge Cordelia as
his unjustly banished daughter, viz., that he is her unjust banishing father. Whereas in following the case of the skeptical recital, I have been
led to ask whether, and on what basis, I can acknowledge the other (simply) as a human being. It is not settled what, if anything, would go beyond the cognitive feat of empathically projecting his humanity; nor
what, if any, relation I bear to him; nor how, if at all, I can reveal myself
to him as having denied this relation.
   But now if these are the questions left unsettled by the skeptical recital,
then we have found some structure in its very inconclusiveness. It is a
structure in which the question "Who, or what, is this other?" (or the
question "Is this in fact an other?") is tied to the question "Who, or what,
am I, that I should be called upon to testify to such a question?". How,
and why, am I thrown back upon myself? — I notice, looking back over
the skeptical recital, that it contains the following, so far unexamined,
feature: that the moment at which I singled out my stranger was the moment at which I also singled out myself. ("I, for one, am prepared to say
that I know that no one of you — you, for instance. . . .")

  I was saying that the skeptical recital had so far not produced a best case
for knowing of the existence of others. Has it, however, produced a best
case for acknowledging their existence? Its inconclusiveness shows at least
that if it has then I do not know that it has, because I do not know
whether I am or am not in such a case, i.e., in such a case with this other
(taking up the suggestion that the problem of the other arises in each
case). So again we must ask: What, if anything, is a best case for the acknowledgment of others, a best placement in which to acknowledge another? — which must mean: in which to acknowledge my relation to the
other. Is there, in particular, a case in which my (outsider's) position is
sufficiently good to produce the force of the skeptic's best case with respect to the external world, namely that if I know anything I know this?
   In Chapter II, I characterized the object before the epistemologist as
compressing within itself, for him, material reality as a whole, the entire

=== p. 430 ===

43°              SKEPTICISM AND THE PROBLEM OF OTHERS

island of reality. He is thrown back upon his senses, alone. How do matters stand with the inquisitor of other minds? He has about him an archipelago; some of it he faces, some of it he does not. It is silent for him
here and now, but he knows no more. Is there a case in which a given
other compresses within himself or herself my view of psychic reality as a
whole; a given other who exemplifies all others for me, humanity as such;
a given other upon whom I stake my capacity for acknowledgment altogether, that is to say, my capacity at once for acknowledging the existence
of others and for revealing my existence in relation to others? And if there
is such a case, then what is the consequence if this case fails, if this other
fails me, if I cannot believe, or feel I cannot know, what this other shows
and says to me? What is the consequence for me and what is the consequence for the other? — As before — before a best case — the consequence
will not extend to different others. I am thrown upon just this other's
body. Nor here, in being thrown back upon myself, does the consequence
extend to different others in my position. No one else is in my position
with respect to this other. I and this other have been singled out for one
another. This is what a best case comes to. If it fails, the remainder of the
world and of my capacities in it have become irrelevant. That there are
others, and others perhaps in my position in relation to them, are matters
not beyond my knowledge but past my caring. I am not removed from
the world; it is dead for me. All for me is but toys; there is for me no new
tomorrow; my chaos is come (again?). I shut my eyes to others.
   But when? If there really was another, and the case failed me, still the
other knows of his or her existence; he or she remains. But this knowledge
has come to me too late. Because now the other remains as unacknowledged, that is, as denied. I have shut my eyes to this other. And this is
now part of this other's knowledge. To acknowledge him now would be
to know this. To deny him now would be to deny this, deny this denial
of him: to shut his eyes to me. Either way I implicate myself in his existence. There is the problem of the other. — The crucified human body is
our best picture of the unacknowledged human soul.
   It is, accordingly, to be expected that we will not willingly subject ourselves to the best case of acknowledgment, indeed that we will avoid the
best if we can, to avoid the worst. (We will have to be singled out. By
what? By whom?) What is the nature of this avoidance? The answer to
that question should contribute to answering the question: What is the
nature of our everyday knowledge of the other?
   Skepticism about material objects reveals, or pictures, the field of everyday knowledge as a whole, or common sense, as intellectually confined.

=== p. 431 ===

(Here again I call explicit attention to Thompson Clarke's "The Legacy
of Skepticism".) It presses the aim of reason itself, to know objectively,
without stint; to penetrate reality itself. It insinuates that there are
grounds for doubt that there is no good reason — no intellectually respectable reason — we do not ordinarily raise. It throws us back upon ourselves, to assess ourselves as knowers. In the grip of its insight, we should
be grateful for whatever consolation can be derived from the interpretation
of ourselves that skepticism thereupon provides us with: we know "for
all practical purposes". (Or, as Austin put it, thinking he thereby denied
the power of skepticism: for all "intents and purposes".) Sometimes Witt-genstein casts the skeptic in his ancient role from the Mysteries, as when
he gives an interlocutor to ask: "But, if you are certain, isn't it that you
are shutting your eyes in face of doubt?" (Investigations, p. 224). The
skeptic insinuates that there are possibilities to which the claim of certainty shuts its eyes; or: whose eyes the claim of certainty shuts. It is the
voice, or an imitation of the voice, of intellectual conscience. Wittgen-stein replies: "They are shut." It is the voice of human conscience. It is
not generally conclusive, but it is more of an answer than it may appear
to be. In the face of the skeptic's picture of intellectual limitedness, Witt-genstein proposes a picture of human finitude. (Then our real need is for
an account of this finitude, especially of what it invites in contrast to
itself.)
   His eyes are shut; he has not shut them. The implication is that the insinuated doubt is not his. But how not? If the philosopher makes them
his, pries the lids up with instruments of doubt, does he not come upon
human eyes? — When I said that the voice of human conscience was not
generally conclusive, I was leaving it open whether it was individually
conclusive. It may be the expression of resolution, at least of confession.
"They (my eyes) are shut", as a resolution, or confession, says that one
can, for one's part, live in the face of doubt. — But doesn't everyone,
everyday? — It is something different to live without doubt, without so
to speak the threat of skepticism. To live in the face of doubt, eyes happily shut, would be to fall in love with the world. For if there is a correct
blindness, only love has it. And if you find that you have fallen in love
with the world, then you would be ill-advised to offer an argument of its
worth by praising its Design. Because you are bound to fall out of love
with your argument, and you may thereupon forget that the world is
wonder enough, as it stands. Or not. (Even if the world has a designer,
and if falling in love with the world is knowing this designer, praising
the Design would not satisfy him or her as an expression of this knowl-

=== p. 432 ===

edge. Unless the praise is directed to him or her; in which case there is no
argument.)
   I have described two thoughts which suggest that there is no strictly
skeptical problem about the existence of other minds. According to the
first thought — that of the "best case for knowing another" — I cannot be
skeptical enough: the other is intact, anyway in being. According to the
second thought — that of the "best case for acknowledging the other" — I
cannot survive my skepticism: the world does not disappear, but I from
it. Now a third thought emerges, or a third way of putting one and the
same thought: there is no everyday alternative to skepticism concerning
other minds. There is no competing common sense of the matter; there is
nothing about other minds that satisfies me for all (practical) purposes; I
already know everything skepticism concludes, that my ignorance of the
existence of others is not the fate of my natural condition as a human
knower, but my way of inhabiting that condition; that I cannot close
my eyes to my doubts of others and to their doubts and denials of me,
 that my relations with others are restricted, that I cannot trust them
 blindly. — You'd be a fool if you did. — Spare me that. That aside, my
 position here is not one of a generalized intellectual shortcoming.

   I do not picture my everyday knowledge of others as confined but as exposed. It is exposed, I would like to say, not to possibilities but to actualities, to history. There is no possibility of human relationship that has
not been enacted. The worst has befallen, befalls everyday. It has merely,
so far as I know, not befallen me. Tragedy figures my exposure to history
as my exposure to fortune or fate; comedy as my exposure to accident or
luck. Each will have its way of figuring this as my exposure to nature;
meaning, in the end, human nature. As if the subjection to history is human nature.
   In knowing others, I am exposed on two fronts: to the other; and to
my concept of the other.
    Being exposed to the other is being exposed to the occurrence of a best
case. I said that it is to be expected that we will avoid the best as long as
 we can. But "avoiding the best" is undeveloped. It means "avoiding the
occurrence of the best", but also "avoiding knowing that an occurrence is
 the best". This development does not apply in the case of the external
 world. There it makes no sense to try to avoid the best; the best is my
 milieu, my life with objects. What the skeptic opens my eyes to is the
 knowledge that this is the best — the occurrence of this tree, of that stone,

=== p. 433 ===

at that distance, in this light, myself undrugged and unhampered, in the
best of health, . . . Then that life is undermined, or distanced from me.
The best proves not to be good enough. (This subjugation of human intellect can, if intermittent, be lived with. It is harder to live with it in the
presence of Job's comforters, who will say, for example, "You don't need
pure certainty anyway. Justified belief is plenty good enough".) I can try
to avoid knowing that I am in the best case with other minds as well.
(Lear and Leontes try this at the beginning of what we know of them;
Othello from the middle until immediately before the end; Anthony and
Cleopatra do not deny the best, but accept it jointly, so their conclusion
modifies, if not quite avoids, tragedy.) But in the case of other minds, I
can also try to avoid the thing itself, avoid getting myself into the best
case. To say that I am exposed to the best case is to say that my attempts
to restrict my relations with others, of my caring for or about some other,
or all others, may, at any place, fail. I may be singled out. (Lear and
Leontes and Othello do not, in the end, avoid this. It is what makes them
who they are.)
   Being exposed to my concept of the other is being exposed to my assurance in applying it, I mean to the fact that this assurance is mine, comes
only from me. The other can present me with no mark or feature on the
basis of which I can settle my attitude. I have to acknowledge humanity
in the other, and the basis of it seems to lie in me. But what do I know of
that basis? At one moment I thought of it as a human capacity that is as
much like dreaming as like seeing. At another I thought that there could
be no sufficient basis in me, that only an Outsider, one free of human nature, could tell me what I would have to know to be assured of the other's
humanity. But I also came to think that if there is an Outsider he is in
me, in each of us. That confirms the idea that there is that in us that is
capable of escaping human nature, here still expressed mythically. The
myth speaks — beyond that of my standing in specific relations to myself —
of the possibility of my gaining perspective on myself. I can, for example,
sometimes gain a perspective on my present pain. It still hurts; I still
mind it; it is still mine; but I find that I can handle it. I do that by grasping it, as though I am no longer incredulous of it, or superstitious. Is
there something that could give me a perspective on my human nature as
such? And would this be a perspective from which I see myself in the
same way, or from the same distance, as I see the other? Could I, for example, see myself as a stranger? This need not be a case of seeing the
strangeness of myself, though that might help my perspective. It would be
a case of seeing that I have not met myself; it happens upon me, the

=== p. 434 ===

knowledge comes over me, that I have not. I would then have an occasion
for taking an interest in myself; it would be an occasion for interesting
myself in something more than I have already heard about myself.
   Are there limits upon the perspective I can have on others and take
upon myself? I have found that the hedging of my acknowledgment of humanity in others hedges my own humanity, shows me the limits of human
nature in me. The absence of the best case shows that our relations are
restricted. The presence of the best case will show that our lack of restriction is limited to one other. The lower limit upon humanity is
marked by the passage into inhumanity. Its signal is horror. The opposite
of terror is the calm of safety; the opposite of horror would be the bliss of
salvation. Is there this opposite? Is there an upper limit on humanity? If
there is, how would I know that I had reached it? How would I know that
I had gone in myself not merely to my limitations for acknowledgment,
but to the limitations of the humanly acknowledgeable?
   Has this use of the concept of acknowledgment been justified, its use to
describe something owed another simply as a human being, the failure of
which reveals the failure of one's own humanity? I said that in the case of
Lear I knew in a general way what he has to reveal about himself in order
to acknowledge Cordelia. Does his failure in this reveal a failure of his
humanity or his failure as a father? Lear comes to think that there is such
a distinction and that his failure is of the former kind. But perhaps that
is just his problem. If one is to acknowledge another as one's neighbor,
one must acknowledge oneself as his or her neighbor. Something may
make one a bad neighbor sometimes, but in itself this hardly constitutes
a failure of one's humanity. One acknowledges one's teacher by acknowledging oneself as his or her student, i.e., presumably, by showing that one
has learned something from him. Some students will feel that this is best
done by maintaining good deportment around the teacher; some teachers
will think so too. One may feel this to be a restricted view of the relation
between teacher and student, but hardly that those who hold it are lacking in humanity: perhaps they are using the wrong words for their relationship. Similarly in the cases of acknowledging another as my sibling or
countryman or comrade or friend or employer or tenant. There is room
for me in which to acknowledge myself as their sibling or countryman or
comrade or friend or employee or landlord. — I think there is a surmise
that these are restricted modes of acknowledgment, appropriate to stations
dictated merely by society, and that society is as such arbitrary; a surmise
that another may be owed acknowledgment simply on the ground of his
humanity, acknowledgment as a human being, for which nothing will do

=== p. 435 ===

but my revealing myself to him as a human being, unrestrictedly, as his
or her sheer other, his or her fellow, his or her semblable. — Surely this
is, if anything, nothing more than half the moralists who ever wrote have
said, that others count, in our moral calculations, simply as persons; or
that we have duties to others of a universal kind, duties to them apart
from any particular stations we occupy. — I think not. Duties are dis-chargeable. The surmise of which I speak is of an acknowledgment that
is not dischargeable; it is something I will, or will not, see, and live with.
The surmise is not that I ought to see, and live with, others as human
beings; it is that I sometimes do so see them, and therefore, mostly do
not. — This is empty juggling. One could equally say: It is not that I
ought to have duties to others as human beings, it is that I sometimes do
have; and that I have such duties is not itself a dischargeable duty; it is
something I will, or will not, live with. And if what you wish to ask is
why I have these duties to others as human beings, the answer is: because
there are other human beings. And if you wish to know how I know that
there are other human beings, the answer is: because I know I have these
duties to them. I also know it because I love some of them and hate some
of them; but neither loving nor hating discharges me of my duties toward
them. — The surmise is that the idea of a duty toward others as human beings might itself be a restriction of my knowledge of their exis-*
tence. — So, then, would hating them be a restriction? — Yes. — And
loving them might also be a restriction? — Yes.
   If it is a mark of insanity not to know that we have duties to others as
human beings, and that we show our humanity in performing them,
wouldn't it be an equal mark of insanity to surmise that others are owed
some unrestricted revelation of our humanity? What would they want it
for? Why place such a burden upon them? Isn't this surmise a part of
Lear's state of mind when he comes upon Edgar and interprets him as a
"poor, bare, forked creature"? Then how does he translate this interpretation into action, what does he do on the basis of his knowledge? — What
would you have him do? Reveal himself to Edgar as his semblable, as yet
another poor, bare, forked creature? A lot of good that would do! He
takes the creature into his shelter with him, out of the gathering storm.
How better to have shown his humanity? What more could reason claim
from him? — It is a measure of Lear's gathering madness that it both
frees him for his exposure to the perception of human otherness and
hence to horror and pity. And also that by the time he enters with the
other into his shelter he is viewing him as "my philosopher", still searching for some restriction upon the other, in particular for some interpreta-

=== p. 436 ===

tion of the reason for this creature's being his. He takes him into the
shelter not to shelter him but to philosophize with him, or rather upon
him; he sees him as an exemplar of humanity, rather than as an instance
of it. In particular, he does not acknowledge him — though this encounter
prepares him for his acknowledgment later, in succession, of Gloucester
and of Cordelia, at least in passing. He merely knows what the other is,
that the creature has humanity. When his prayer is answered, to feel what
others feel — the storm is the answer — he is in full madness.
    Why is it this creature in whom the King first glimpses the human as
such? Such a creature exemplifies the restriction of society, that there is
that in the human creature which is undefined by social station, or by any
property; he is bare, laid bare. Call him an outcast. Then for the King, as
he stood, to have acknowledged him would have meant acknowledging
himself as one who casts out. For him to have acknowledged him simply
as another, a semblable, would have meant casting himself out. Lear is so
 far prepared for neither action.
    Why are there these two possibilities of acknowledgment with respect
 to the outcast? Or why not in all other relations as well? The lawyer may
 acknowledge some other not only as a client but as another lawyer; a
 parent may acknowledge some other not (only) as a child but as another
 parent; and similarly for the landlord, the teacher, the employer, etc. The
 lawyer or teacher is not in natural league with other lawyers or other
 teachers, though perhaps in political league. But the lawyer or teacher or
 employer or landlord has not created the existence of clients or students
 or employees or tenants; they are created together. And where I can literally be said to have "created the existence of the other", in the case of my
 children, the call upon me, my answerability, is unrestricted, though my
 rights are not. Whereas what? In the case of the outcast I have created this
 existence, and can acknowledge it neither from my point of view nor
  from theirs? I think it is part of the surmise of my restricted humanity
  that I have created the outcast, or anyway that I am in league with those
  who have; that we have; that my society is mine; hence that I have consented to casting out. An expression of this surmise would be the idea that
  outcasts are in natural league with one another. This would be a distortion and projection of my own sense of outcastness.
     One may express the knowledge that others are outcasts through one's
  humanitarianism. Thinkers such as Thoreau and Dickens were perhaps
  sometimes too hard on the ordinary shows of such an instinct, but what
  they saw in these humanitarian shows was a wish to convert the outcast
  into a social role, or into a kind or class of being — in any case, a wish to

