=== chunk: cavell-1979-claim-of-reason/ch13d-romanticism-and-vanishing ===
title: Romanticism, narcissism, vanishing of the human
source_pdf: docs/sources/cavell-1979-claim-of-reason/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 490-523
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 463
plan_page_end: 496
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 463 ===

   One in this condition does not feel unknown for the reason that the
fact of his or her sentience is taken to be unknown. Why should a dog, a
horse, a rat, have life, and be known to have it, and others not? Expertise
cannot be required to know of this life, but then what appreciation is
wanted, what sentiment or sensibility would be fine enough to vibrate to
one's originality? Human beings do not naturally desire isolation and incomprehension, but union or reunion, call it community. It is in faithfulness to that desire that one declares oneself unknown. (And of course
the faithfulness, the desire, and the declaration may all be based on illusion. The conceptual connection, however, would remain as real as ever.)
The wish to be extraordinary, exceptional, unique, thus reveals the wish
to be ordinary, everyday. (One does not, after all, wish to become a monster, even though the realization of one's wish for uniqueness would make
one a monster.) So both the wish for the exceptional and for the everyday
are foci of romanticism. One can think of romanticism as the discovery
that the everyday is an exceptional achievement. Call it the achievement
of the human. — I believe I know something of the impatience such
ideas can inspire. Think of the spectacle of the likes of Rousseau and
Thoreau and Kierkegaard and Tolstoy and Wittgenstein going around
hoping to be ordinary, preaching the everyday as the locale of the sublime! Only the madness of their egotism, the monstrousness of it, requires
such vaults of relief! Only sinners so crave sanctity! — Quite right. Quite
right. The everyday is everyday, the ordinary is ordinary, or you haven't
found it. — How true that is. How very true. And yet if what those monsters of egotism and of vision saw is there, then your assurance is as egotistical as theirs, merely less instructive; or else you are as cynical as you
evidently are complacent. (My caution against believing the monster can
only make sense to someone who knows his or her own human capacities
well enough to be moved to believe him. I would not waste my spirit
preaching hardness to a stone.)

   The only way to prove that someone is not mad — or otherwise dismissible — in claiming epistemological exemption for himself, the singling
out for unknownness, is to describe some cases, some versions of a type.
We might think of them as versions of narcissism, a concept that might
prove increasingly useful in studying (passive) skepticism, since it covers
both a primary development in childhood and the foundation of a particular direction of madness in adulthood. Some again will think of them
as versions of adolescence. The only reason I would have for objecting to

=== p. 464 ===

this thought is the naughty implication that such a one just ought to
grow up. If Rousseau can be said to have discovered the fact of childhood
in human growth, and Wordsworth the loss of childhood, then romanticism generally may be said to have discovered the fact of adolescence, the
task of wanting and choosing adulthood, along with the impossibility of
this task. The necessity of the task is the choice of finitude, which for us
(even after God) means the acknowledgment of the existence of finite
others, which is to say, the choice of community, of autonomous moral
existence. The impossibility lies in the options of community that the
older grownups have left, which no one could want, not with a whole
heart. So romantics dream revolution, and break their hearts. And so adolescents and adults agree on this one point, that to become adult is to
grow up from your dreams. You needn't be Martin Heidegger to count
the achievement of modern individual existence as beginning with its
eclipse in modern society and then graduating in its increasingly distant
refinement of singularity. John Stuart Mill a hundred years earlier, and
for the sake of similar perceptions, accepts the fact, or fate, that the only
proof of liberty lies in idiosyncrasy. The problem completes itself when
we no longer know whether we are idiosyncratic or not, which differences
between us count, whether we have others. — After such community,
what privacy?
   I find one version of such a type in the life of Rousseau, who thus becomes for me a significant case in the modern history of our concept of
the knowledge, and ignorance, of other minds — as I suppose he was for
himself. So I am taking it that his sense of rejection, of others as refusing
to know him, as denying him, is — well, not normal exactly, but, let us
say, composed of equal parts of abnormality and of validity. Then the
writing of his Confessions should be regarded as an effort to create the individual other who would be in a position, and who would care, to accept him. But if the Confessions is of his whole life, then he can only be
known posthumously. People who know themselves to be masters of this
species of communication, and of no other, are likely to welcome the
hereafter.
   A different version of one who regards himself as unknowable would
give up the effort to create his knower, even posthumously. He has become a virtuoso of confession, an entertainer with his suffering. The
point of his recitals is not to reveal himself, even when everything he
says about himself is true. For him the thing of self-revelation is quite
impossible — those who care cannot know, those who know cannot care
enough. The virtuosity beguiles his anonymity and the other's boredom.

=== p. 465 ===

Here the very capacity for intimacy measures the fact of isolation; measures the depth of privacy unshared, i.e., refused.
   That types of the passive skeptic should naturally present themselves
as typical figures of romanticism registers (whatever else romantic self-assertion shows) the apprehension that human subjectivity, the concept
of human selfhood, is threatened; that it must be found and may be lost;
that if one's existence is to be proven it can be proven only from oneself;
and that upon that proof turns what proof there is in the continued existence of the human as such. This is what happens to the Renaissance
project of the humanization of the world by the time the project is taken
up in romanticism. It is not to be expected that everyone will adopt, nor
so much as credit, such a project. Some will even find it arrogant to offer
oneself as the exemplar, or fate, of humanity. Presumably such a one will
regard it as modest to offer proofs for the existence of others.
   Here are two romantic ways to understand the project of proving the
existence of the human.
   Suppose that after the onslaughts of Hume and Kant, no self-respecting
thinker will any longer seek a proof for the existence of God as our creator. If anything, the reverse seems undeniably the case. But the consequences of such a reversal cannot be obvious at once. In particular, we
are apt to be stuck with the idea of the human being as a creature, meaning a living thing, something procreated; but meaning equally something
created. Then we seem to have the following choice. Either we attempt to
give up the idea of the human being as created, in which case we attempt
to naturalize the human being, to understand this being in relation to
(non-human) nature, an attempt sometimes described as locating the human being's place in nature; or else we retain the idea of ourselves as
created and attempt further to humanize this creation, identifying ourselves now as the creators of ourselves, since obviously no other being
could be eligible for such a role. — One might undertake to show that
there is no such choice, or rather that the choices come to the same point,
call it the return of the human, as of the repressed. But these approaches
to this return seem slated for disappointment. In the former case, that of
relocating ourselves in nature, human beings keep discovering themselves
in opposition to nature, whether for Descartes's reasons or for Rousseau's
or for Kant's or for Blake's or for Wordsworth's or for Marx's or for
Thoreau's. In the latter case, that of accepting ourselves as our creator,
we would have to accept responsibility for ourselves, in particular have
to consent to our present state as something we desire, or anyway desire
more than we desire change; and this could drive us mad, as Rousseau

=== p. 466 ===

was mad, or Nietzsche, or as Marx and Thoreau were. We are apt to turn
upon our creation in anger, as, according to us — and who knows this better? — the Creator did.
   Or suppose that romanticism can be thought of as the discovery, or one
rediscovery, of the subjective; the subjective as the exceptional; or the
discovery of freedom as a state in which each subject claims its right to
recognition, or acknowledgment; the right to name and assess its own satisfaction. I take as paradigmatic of this discovery the complex moment in
Essay on the Origin of Languages at which Rousseau establishes the context — it is not exactly the formulation of a language-game — in which the
human being gives a name to his semblable, his other, calls him human,
hence has a name for himself.

Upon meeting others, a savage man will initially be frightened. Because of his
fear he sees the others as bigger and stronger than himself. He calls them giants.
After many experiences, he recognizes that these so-called giants are neither
bigger nor stronger than he. Their stature does not approach the idea he had
initially attached to the word giant. So he invents another name common to
them and to him, such as the name man, for example, and leaves giant to the
fictitious object that had impressed him during his illusion. That is how the
figurative word is born before the literal word, when our gaze is held in passionate fascination; and how it is that the first idea it conveys to us is not that
of the truth. ["That the First Language Had To Be Figurative"]

All I ask attention to here is that the first naming of the other is characterized by Rousseau in such a way as to encourage imagining it as taking
the form of an exclamation: upon meeting others, the savage man has an
experience on the basis of which he calls something out, something is
called forth from him. (". . . Both the report and the exclamation are
expressions of perception and of visual experience. But the exclamation is
so in a different sense from the report: it is forced from us. — It is related to the experience as a cry is to pain" (Investigation, p. 197).) When
subsequently, on the basis of noticing the empirical analogies between
himself and others, he displaces the first name called forth from him in
favor of another, he does not, according to my reading of the passage,
displace the experience that brought forth the name; he rather, as it
were, displaces his explanation of the feeling. Fright (anyway, the experience of others as fearful) remains the basis of the knowledge of the existence of others; only now we no longer interpret the threat as a function
of the other's bulk or body. We seem left with the other's sheer otherness,
 the fact that he, too, is an I, hence can name and know us. One can regard
 this moment in Rousseau as an effort to answer the question of others

=== p. 467 ===

formed in Wittgenstein's Investigations — or, removing the surface anachronism, one can regard Wittgenstein's question as a rediscovery of the
moment discovered in Rousseau: "What gives us so much as the idea that
living beings — things — can feel?" (Investigations, §283).
   I do not ask that Rousseau's answer be accepted — that the idea, anyway
about human things, comes as an interpretation of one's fear of their presence, which perhaps means a fear at the recognition, the objedification, or
engraving, of one's own image, its theft from us. Behind my suggestion
here is a certain understanding of what the savage man is initially frightened by in being frightened by an other. A natural reading of Rousseau's
scene is to take the savage man to be frightened by one who is frightened
upon meeting him. (It is of the essence of this passage of initial human confrontation to see that everything said about either the one or the other is
true of both.) Does he therefore understand himself as fearful? Or isn't it
rather that, since he is frightened, he cannot regard himself as the object
of the other's fear? In either case he is frightened by an expression of fright.
When, "after many experiences . . . he invents a name common to them
and to him", he will interpret that expression of the other's fright and recognize himself as an object of fear; it is then possible for him to be afraid
of himself and to shun his company. But before this time, how does he
understand that expression of fright to be directed to him, on the part
of one who cannot be frightened of him? It would make sense for him to
take it as an imitation of himself, showing him how he looks, the image
of himself in the presence of others. Quite as if he were the giant, or anyway
possessed of some form of the monstrous. It will have to be hidden.
   I ask merely that the level of Rousseau's answer be considered as a
datum in the problem of other minds, indeed that the Essay on the Origin
of Languages, and the companion Discourse on Inequality, be recognized
as studies of the problem of others. Then a twin datum would be that
romanticism opens with the discovery of the problem of other minds, or
with the discovery that the other is a problem, an opening of philosophy.
I mean truly that I ask this to be considered, not that I engage this consideration, for I am so far in a position merely to rummage among such
texts, not to possess them.
   In the same spirit, I wish to put this moment of the beginning of romanticism together with a moment plausibly taken as its end, the moment
of Hegel's Philosophy of Right. In that work Hegel refers to "the right
of the subject's particularity, his right to be satisfied, or in other words
 the right of subjective freedom", as "the pivot and center of the difference
 between antiquity and modern times". And he continues: "This right in

=== p. 468 ===

its infinity is given expression in Christianity and it has become the universal effective principle of a new form of civilization". The rest of history
is the working out, the concrete expressions, shapings, of this right (section
124, addition). Then I might put the question "Is there such a thing as
soul-blindness?" in the following way: Is this new form of civilization
being replaced by another? In particular, is it being replaced by one in
which nothing that happens any longer strikes us as the objectification of
subjectivity, as the act of an answerable agent, as the expression and satisfaction of human freedom, of human intention and desire? What has a
beginning can have an end. If this future (civilization?) were effected its
members would not be dissatisfied. They would have lost the concept of
satisfaction. Then nothing would (any longer) give them the idea that
living beings, human things, could feel. So they would not (any longer)
be human. They would not, for example, be frightened upon meeting
others — except in the sense, or under circumstances, in which they would
be frightened upon encountering bears or storms, circumstances under
which bears would be frightened. And of course particular forms of
laughter and of amazement would also no longer be possible, ones which
depend upon clear breaks between, say, machines and creatures. — Would
 the vanishing of the human betoken the absolute success of the scientific
 Weltanschauung? It would betoken the success of the picture of science,
 of knowledge, as subjugation — not now as that by which the human
 being subjugates the world, and overcomes superstition and magic, but
 now as that by which the human being is subjugated. So science falls back,
 or forward, into magic.

  This fantasy of the vanishing of the human — it would contain the
fantasy in which empathic projection becomes "seamless", or ceases, and
we no longer recognize, or take an interest in, the difference between
things and beings (the difference!) — is a reassertion of the idea that the
problem of other minds is a problem of human history (the problem of
modern human history; the modern problem of human history); that the
problem is lived, and that this life has an origin and a progress. The idea is
that the problem of the other is discovered through telling its history.
Then how could this history be recounted; what would it be a recounting
of? If it is true, if the idea is sound, that skepticism with respect to others, in
both its active and its passive forms, is lived and has a history, then what
that history contains, what it must recount, can only be determined from
within the life, or perspective, of that skepticism itself, as a discovery of its

=== p. 469 ===

own problems and of the shapes taken in its solutions to its problems. The
extent to which I have uncovered the perspective of skepticism concerning
other minds leads me to expect that its history will contain an account of
its origins in the following developments.
   i. Most obviously, it will wish an account of the particular insanity
required, or caused, or threatened, in the very conceiving of the problem.
The kinds of insanity — or folly — Descartes imagines his case may be
compared with in undertaking to initiate his skeptical perspective, are
ones arising from his undertaking to doubt that his ("these") hands and
his ("this") body are his. The instances of folly he imagines are, accordingly, ones in which human beings do not know that they are flesh (but
suppose themselves made of clay or glass) or do not know their identities
or their true circumstances (but suppose themselves kings when they are
actually paupers, or clothed when they are naked). (If Descartes's intuitions, or fantasies, of knowledge and of doubt are to be followed, then the
interpretation of skeptical doubt as neurotic is evidently hopeless.) The
insanity of which Rousseau is accused is not of this kind. It is called
(loosely, I believe) a form of paranoia. But what creates this impression
of him? Here are two of his ideas that may encourage it: first, that he has
become unknowable — private — because to know him would be to know
the sentiments of his heart — in particular, his pity for others and his fears
of them — and the sentiments of the heart have become unintelligible to
(inexpressible by) other human beings (as a result of what they perceive
as human progress); second, that our social bonds are not the realization
but the betrayal of the social contract, in a word, conspiracies, so that
there is among us no public thing at all. But are these ideas signs of madness? They would be if Rousseau believed, as perhaps from time to time
he did think, that he alone was thus denied acknowledgment, and that the
conspiracy of society was directed specifically against him. I am not now
interested in asserting that these ideas may be sane, but rather in suggesting that not every form of madness is possible, and certainly not typical,
in every period; that madness has its history, and that it may be part of
Rousseau's originality to have discovered an original shape of madness.
He would have borrowed elements of this shape from the fates of Cas-sandra and Phedre, figures earlier maddened through an isolation, an
unknownness, caused by their possession of incommunicable knowledge.
Thinking of Nietzsche as a later avatar in this line, it strikes me as especially brave of Thoreau to have refused derangement; that is, to have
recognized the achievement of sanity as the goal, or ratification, of his
arrangements. But then of course he was free of European quarrels, and,

=== p. 470 ===

in effect, or in the fiction of Walden (i.e., of America), free of intellectual
competitors (i.e., companions) altogether. Some freedom.
    2. The life of skepticism with respect to (other) minds will next require
a history of its imagined overcomings, particularly of its idea that to
know or be known by another is to penetrate or be penetrated by another,
to occupy or be occupied. This idea would be prepared by the idea, or
creation, of the self as private (hence, as said, as guilty). Hence its overcoming will take the form of violating that privacy. Doubtless Descartes
is working also here: "We are now in a position to see the precise nature
of Descartes's innovation in philosophy of mind. The introduction of
cogitatio as the defining characteristic of mind is tantamount to the substitution of privacy for rationality as the mark of the mental. For somebody like Aquinas, human beings were distinguished from animals by
such things as their capacity to understand geometry and to desire riches.
Neither . . . is a specially private state . . ." (Kenny, "Cartesian Privacy", p, 360). It should be considered also that an initiating form for the
achievement of privacy would be the convulsion of sensibility we call the
rise of Protestantism. From then on, one manages one's relation to God
alone, in particular one bears the brunt alone of being known to God.
 Here nothing that could be told in confession could be confession enough,
since what I possess is no longer merely secrets, but an existence essentially
unknowable to myself, namely, whether I am of the elect, or faithful.
    As long as God exists, I am not alone. And couldn't the other suffer
 the fate of God? It strikes me that it was out of the terror of this possibility
 that Luther promoted the individual human voice in the religious life. I
 wish to understand how the other now bears the weight of God, shows me
 that I am not alone in the universe. This requires understanding the
 philosophical problem of the other as the trace or scar of the departure
 of God. This descent, or ascent, of the problem of the other is the key way
 I can grasp the alternative process of secularization called romanticism.
 And it may explain why the process of humanization can become a monstrous undertaking, placing infinite demands upon finite resources. It is
 an image of what living our skepticism comes to.
    It is to be expected that the idea of knowledge as the violation of privacy (or punishment for it) will be eroticized, enacted in forms of sexual
 life. So our history will have to account for the romantic obsession, or
 theatricalization, of what we used to think of as sexual perversion, in particular with sadism and masochism; at any rate, with the wish for absolute
 activeness and absolute passiveness; which is to say, for absolute recognition of and by another. ("Absolute" here arises as it did miles ago when I

=== p. 471 ===

was discussing how one got taken "outside language games". I want my
existence proven by evidence that I cannot supply, and need not. And
the same goes for the existence of others.) That this sexualization of
knowledge should take the form of a theatricalization of the relation between master and slave should be seen in the light of Hegel's notion that
the taking possession of oneself — the, as it were, subjugation of the self
by the self as a declaration of individual freedom, hence as a stage in the
achievement of human freedom as such (in the State) — begins in what he
calls "the fight for recognition and the relationship of master and slave"
(Philosophy of Right, section 57). Taking this together with the occurrence of the topic in the Phenomenology of Mind, we should ask: What
happens to individuals if they tire of history, can take no further mediation, become lost or captivated on the path of self-realization and inter-subjectivity — if they become "reified" rather than "concretized"? If we
speak of perversions of human existence, this will encompass disturbances
of satisfaction no more sexual than epistemological, and no more these
than political. (Subsidiary topics here will accordingly be the eroticization
of seeing and hearing, as well as of political subjugation.)
   3. Then we will, accordingly, want in our history an account of our
attitudes toward the human body. This will consist importantly of libels
and of attempts to undo certain libels against the body, sometimes by directly discrediting them (Nietzsche could not praise Luther too highly for
his efforts here), sometimes by enacting or literalizing them (so that de
Sade, for example, would be seen to be enacting the dictates of nature, if
you like, only under a Christian interpretation of nature, of human nature
as requiring mortification). My own choice as the hero of this particular
piece of history is William Blake, who can ask and answer questions
this way:
                     What is it men in women do require
                     The lineaments of Gratified Desire
                     What is it women do in men require
                     The lineaments of Gratified Desire
Here is a brave acceptance of the sufficiency of human finitude, an
achievement of the complete disappearance of its disappointment, in oneself and in others, an acknowledgment of satisfaction and of reciprocity.
   More or less obviously, in writers from Blake and Hegel to Thoreau
and Nietzsche, the working through of secularization requires the constructing of a mythology to rival that of Christianity, which in practice
means to reinterpret Christianity, bone by bone. But nothing is obvious
about "secularization", especially not whether in a given case it looks like,

=== p. 472 ===

as one might call it, eternalization. The progressive dissociation of spirit
and nature (hence the possible disappearance of both) is more commonly
thought of, I believe, in spatial rather than in these temporal terms, i.e.,
as a process of the progressive internalization and externalization of human interests. The guiding thought in either case is that each is a function
of the other, that these are sides of some progressing bilateralization of
the human, entailing some further fearful symmetries. One symptom or
perception of this progress is Mill's familiar division or attribution of his
intellectual inheritance, hence of that of the world of mind generally,
equally between Bentham and Coleridge. Emerson knew in himself a division between what he called Materialism and Idealism (in "Transcendentalism"); it is just such division, say between the "real" and the "ideal",
that a philosopher like John Dewey meant to put a stop to, with his kit
of pre-Marxian and pre-Freudian tools. This polar sense or fantasy is of
the mind unmoored, say unhinged, leaving itself without material in
which to realize and communicate itself; it is an anxiety of progressive
inexpressiveness, named as such in Coleridge's "Dejection", some lines
from which Mill quotes in his Autobiography as describing exactly the
case of his mental crisis. His case of depression becomes fully representative, historical, when he characterizes "the general tone of [his] mind at
 this period" as one in which he was "seriously tormented by the thought
 of the exhaustibility of musical combinations", calculating in a premature, uncanny premonition that the twelve tones of the octave must have
 about yielded all their usable combinations up, so that "there could not
 be room for a long succession of Mozarts and Webers to strike out, as these
 had done, entirely new and surprisingly rich veins of musical beauty".
 The concept of inexpressiveness, related to a sense of negative uniqueness,
 or depressed privacy, abutting the concept of the exhaustion of the medium of an art, leaving no room for anything new or original to be said
 in it, is what I am calling representative, or historical, in Mill's case. It is
 a historical enactment of the lie of concepts I found excavated by the
 "private language argument".
    (I ask attention to this conjunction again here not to continue it now
 but merely to mark one place from which I hope a continuation of the
 work of these pages might take its bearings, and to permit myself reference to places in other writings of mine in which it is a little continued:
  in The Senses of Walden, as, e.g., the "theme of outsideness" (pp. 54-60);
  and in "More of The World Viewed", under the title "secular mysteries",
  forms which explore "the distance between the depth to which an ordinary human life requires expression, and the surface of ordinary means

=== p. 473 ===

through which that life must, if it will, express itself" (p. 587, and pp.
606-7, note). I should like to mention here W. J. Bate's The Burden of
the Past and the English Poet as containing, among other things, a set of
texts showing the progressive fear of artistic exhaustion, and proof that
the romantic poets' mission of originality does not separate them from
the earlier eighteenth century, but joins them with it. If John Stuart Mill
can experience such things, no later writer can be free of them; then no
later man or woman can be.)
   A beautiful and sufficiently explicit statement of "secularization" concerning our relation to nature, occurs, to my ear, in some lines from the
Boy of Winander passage in Book V of Wordworth's Prelude. The Boy
has been hooting "to the silent owls that they might answer him" and they
respond with "concourse wild". (Some forty years later, by waters just
outside Concord, Thoreau will speak for a cat-owl that produced a "thrilling discord" in which he claims there could be discriminated an unseen
and unheard concord.)
                                          And when it chanced
              That pauses of deep silence mock'd his skill,
              Then sometimes, in that silence, while he hung
              Listening, a gentle shock of mild surprize
              Has carried far into his heart the voice
              Of mountain torrents; or the visible scene
              Would enter unawares into his mind
              With all its solemn imagery, its rocks,
              Its woods, and that uncertain Heaven, receiv'd
              Into the bosom of the steady Lake.
"Receiv'd into the bosom" suggests death. Heaven, become uncertain,
died; and what happened to it is that it became nature. One absorbs both
this uncertainty and this steadiness in coming to know both how to elicit
nature's response and how to be surprised by its silent and independent
existence. (How to be surprised that there is a world.) Is this knowledge?
Is it produced by poetry or by history or by philosophy? Or preserved?
  4. The historical period we are directly interested in, one origin of
which is Rousseau's discovery of the naming of the human, is one in which
a "science" of the human was being called for. Whatever Hume meant
by the subtitle of his Treatise of Human Nature — "an attempt to introduce the experimental method of reasoning into moral subjects" — its
implication is that we so far do not, but we are about to, know ourselves
for what we are — as, since Newton, we know the inanimate universe. Now
a special feature of the skepticism whose history we request will concern
the fact that we still do not know whether this science of the human has

=== p. 474 ===

been established or not. It remains an issue of academic as well as of
newspaper debate, and sometimes of inner conflict: Is Freudian psychology a science? Is Behaviorism? Is Marxism? It is essential to our history that the subject — call it psychology — was explicitly called for as an
imitation of an undoubted science; a call that, so far as I hear, continues
unabated; so the subject remains without the authority, or autonomy, to
call itself knowledge. Hume remarks in his Introduction that " 'Tis no
astonishing reflection to consider, that the application of experimental
philosophy to moral subjects should come after that to natural at the distance of above a whole century", since a comparable lag can be seen in
Greece a couple of millennia ago. Then is it not astonishing that Hume
does not consider, or note as a curiosity, that the "application of experimental philosophy" to nature also came at a distance, that natural science
itself has origins, that it, too, is a part of human history?
    Suppose what one thinks is that the science of the human has not been
established. Is such a one, therefore, to consider that we are still living in
 a pre-scientific era with respect to the knowledge of humanity — so that,
 for example, what we think of as psychology will bear to some future, real
 body of knowledge, call it psychonomy, the relation that astrology bore
 to astronomy? The implication of the question is that our state is not
merely one of ignorance, which can be overcome through experience (or
 "experiment"), but of magic (infected with what we will come to see as
 fanaticism and superstition), a kind of psychic savagery, which can only
 be overcome through a change of our natural reactions, through a certain
 continuation of the motivations and observations of that very magic. If,
 for example, one is convinced that one is known through the concepts and
 procedures of Freudian psychology, that Freud's insights precipitate
 shapes of thought in which the human is, if still without sufficient refinement, genuinely known — that the human being must be whatever it is
 required to be if those shapes of thought are valid (in particular that the
  human individual, to win freedom, must be something that can fight for
 recognition, which now means, vie with its incorporated interpretations
  of itself for a voice, for the leading voice, in its history) — then it is pointless to discuss learnedly with the unconvinced whether this psychology is
  "scientific" (though courtesy might require conversation; and so might
  some as yet undefined form of intellectual shame). Anyway, the question
  is whether it is knowledge; and the problem for one whose stake is to deny
  that one is captured by this knowledge turns on one's ability to compete
  successfully against it, i.e., to give alternative interpretations of the phenomena, and the relations among the phenomena, of dreams and laughter

=== p. 475 ===

and accidents and repetitions, etc., and, more generally, an alternative to
the vision of behavior as a hieroglyph of the soul. (The simplest alternative, I guess the most common, is to say that our behavior and our dreams
mean nothing. And this might be true. I mean, someone might be living
this. We might all come to.) To one convinced of his capture by this mode
of knowledge, the origins of psychoanalysis among the mists of hypnosis
and, a bit more archaically, among the visions of mesmerists and physi-ognomists, can seem a reassuring recapitulation of the rise of science out
of, or in overcoming, magic. To one unconvinced, this will be oppositely
reassuring, for surely nothing born in such circumstances could be legitimate science!
   What motives and intuitions of the magic concerning the mind should
be overcome, hence faced, in a science of mind? One intuition is that we
are subject to "influences" from one another, to mutual "magnetisms", to
certain chemical-like "affinities". Such properties, as in the case of an
analogous intuition with respect to nature, must remain occult apart from
developments analogous with the discovery of the magnet. Is it possible
that psychonomy, or rather certain psychonomers, already exist, and have
existed, on the basis of such a discovery? Could such knowledge be possessed by just a few — call it the discovery of the social bonds, or bondage;
of the (outer) laws of association, let us say — who for some reason cannot
communicate them to the rest of us?
   Consider the following observation:

Instead of the injured party, the injured universal now comes on the scene, and
. . . takes over the pursuit and the avenging of crime, and this pursuit consequently ceases to be the subjective and contingent retribution of revenge and is
transformed into the genuine reconciliation of right with itself, i.e., into punishment. Objectively, this is the reconciliation of the law with itself; by the annulment of the crime, the law is restored and its authority is thereby actualized.
Subjectively, it is the reconciliation of the criminal with himself, i.e., with the
law known by him as his own and as valid for him and his protection; when this
law is executed upon him, he himself finds in this process the satisfaction of
justice and nothing save his own act. [Hegel, Philosophy of Right, section 220]

How shall we characterize this as a mode of thought? In its personifications (e.g., "the injured universal now comes on the scene") it sounds like
allegory and mythology, hence like some depasse' literary mode. It also
sounds like history, sort of; anyway, as if opening itself to historical evidence. It would sound more like history if history were regarded as the
anthropology of our pasts, of the presents of the distant tribes whose
present we are. It also sounds like psychology, sort of; anyway, as if open-

=== p. 476 ===

ing itself to psychological evidence. But if one applied what we are likely
to consider psychology to this passage, especially to its concluding sentence
(". . . it is the reconciliation of the criminal with himself . . ."), we are
more than likely to understand it as a social piety, either perfectly proper
(an attempt to elicit soul-saving repentance) or perfectly tyrannical (a
soul-destroying attempt to mortify the criminal into bringing peace to
those who destroy him). Here is a remark of Nietzsche's that I understand
as a comment on this passage, and to be seeking a perspective from which
to rationalize it, i.e., to show that the cultural stance it depicts has not
achieved rationality:

You do not want to kill, O judges and sacrificers, until the animal has nodded?
Behold, the pale criminal has nodded: out of his eyes speaks the great contempt.
[Thus Spoke Zarathustra, "On the Pale Criminal"]

If your practices require the separate consent of those who suffer from
them, then you must consider that the thing you read as affirmation (the
nodding) is itself produced by the suffering (perhaps a lowering of the
head, which may mean defeat or may signal attack).
   5. I have said that the perspective I seek in these histories is present
not only in philosophical allegories and mythologies (perhaps concerning
the human body seeking its original unity, before its division into individual males and females; or the one about being able to doubt whether
my body is mine but not whether my mind is mine; or the one about my
not being able to have your feelings and so not knowing whether you
have them) but also in various literary structures, especially in those we
call tragedies (hence doubtless in comedies as well) and more recently,
perhaps, also in tales of the fantastic and of horror. This is a claim, in
effect, that these structures provide us with the knowledge of the Outsider.
 All and only what the Outsider can know of us is what the history of
 these literary forms would show.
   That I am pushed to pieces of literature to discover the problem of
 the other, that I find the problem largely undiscovered for philosophy, for
 philosophy as it commands English and hence was carried unawares into
 my mind, is a fact I might think of this way. The problem of the other
 was always known, or surmised, not to be a problem of knowledge, or
 rather to result not from a disappointment over a failure of knowledge
 but from a disappointment over its success (even, from a horror of its
 success). When most recently we retraced the matter of our disappointment with criteria (which we might as well stick to calling our disappointment with human knowledge) we found what I called two old possibilities

=== p. 477 ===

in view, that I fail to manifest our criteria accurately or that the other
fails to read them accurately. Now if the problem of the other is a problem of the victory of knowledge, then it is equally a problem of this victory over myself, determining the nature of my self-consciousness. Then
two things happen: I try avoiding further knowledge for myself by taking
the problem of other minds solely from the passive side; and I thus find a
new possibility for disappointment with knowledge, that my self-consciousness comes between my consciousness and my expression of it, so that
my expressions are embarrassed, are no longer natural. But if my expressions are no longer natural they are no longer the foundation of certainty
about my (inner) life, no longer criterial. And if no longer natural then
they are artificial, merely conventional. I theatricalize myself. The problem of the other now, the problem in being known, is not that the other
does not see me as human, but rather that the other (only) sees me, and
always as a human something or other. So, consequently, do I take myself.
My existence is proven, but at the price of not knowing what it is in itself.
And the existence of others is proven, but at the price of their being
spectators of my existence, not participants in it.
    One text from which to decipher the significance of our suffocating
from the half-swallowed apple of knowledge is Kleist's "Marionette Theater". Is being human exactly to be incapable either of swallowing it or
spitting it out? Is the gasping of the human voice, say sobbing or laughing,
the best proof of the human? or best picture, i.e., mask? To swallow once
for all would be to live always within ordinary language-games, within
the everyday; to spit once for all would be to exist apart from just that
life, to live without. In particular, to live without the human voice (e.g.,
without appeal, without protest). — Is the temptation to knowledge a
product of the prohibition of knowledge, or the other way around, the
prohibition a projection or explanation of the temptation? (The decisive
moment in the conjuring trick.)
    — For you the claim that the Outsider's knowledge of us is the study
of literature is as safe as it is obscure. Since you read the problem of the
other as the problem of acknowledging one's relation to the other; and
since you claim that the history of the failures of these relations is a history of skepticism and of attempts to overcome skepticism; then since
fiction can safely be said to be "about" human relationships, sure enough
 fiction is about acknowledgment and its limitations; and then if one accepts your characterization of tragedy as the failure of the best case of
 acknowledgment, one has already accepted it as your characterization of
skepticism. And indeed, aren't your "best cases" really just cases of love?

=== p. 478 ===

And everyone will concede that dramatic fictions tend to be dramas of
love, and of course, if you like, dramas of the avoidances of love, even of
the horrors of it. — But then what I have said should contribute to an
understanding of why dramas are about love, and what it is they provide
us with a knowledge of, and why this knowledge takes the form it does, viz.,
of acknowledgment, or of its impossibility. And of course I am counting
on what I have said to raise the question of whether, and of how, we know
differences between the writing of literature and the writing of philosophy.
   Since I shall say no more in defense of such ideas here, I surface with
two or three Shakespearean texts, further instances in which skepticism
with respect to other minds is more or less explicitly under investigation,
to illustrate not merely that tragedy is the story and study of a failure of
acknowledgment, of what goes before it and after it — i.e., that the form of
tragedy is the public form of the life of skepticism with respect to other
minds — but specifically to illustrate, or to prompt the study of, the element in the problem of others that my perspective upon the problem has
kept leading back to, namely, the idea and fate of the human body in these
histories.

   The most explicit passage is the most famous of Shylock's speeches,
which directly takes the look of an argument from analogy, mounted
from the passive side. Shy lock has just listed his abuses at the hands of
Antonio and asks the reason for them. Shylock gives his answer: "I am
a Jew."

Hath not a Jew eyes? hath not a Jew hands, organs, dimensions, senses, affections, passions? fed with the same food, hurt with the same weapons, subject to
the same diseases, healed by the same means, warmed and cooled by the same
winter and summer as a Christian is? — if you prick us do we not bleed? if you
tickle us do we not laugh? if you poison us do we not die? and if you wrong us
shall we not revenge? — if we are like you in the rest, we will resemble you in
that. If a Jew wrong a Christian, what is his humility? revenge! If a Christian
wrong a Jew, what should his sufferance be by Christian example? — why revenge!
The villainy you teach me I will execute, and it shall go hard but I will better
the instruction. [The Merchant of Venice, III, i]

That is, for present purposes: My body, and its fates, the visible part of
me, is the same as the Christian's. —And then the philosophical conclusion one would expect Shylock to draw, or ask to be drawn, is that the
invisible part is the same as well; reason is compelled to admit as much.
It is true that Shylock includes more in his premisses of "the visible part"

=== p. 479 ===

of himself than a purer philosopher would; he includes things that the
philosopher would regard as part of the conclusion of the argument from
analogy, e.g., senses, affections, passions; and hence seems to beg the
question. But though less pure, Shylock is more knowing. He knows, what
any sensible person knows, that the purer argument must fail, that one
who does not already know that the other's body "is connected with"
sentience cannot be convinced by this argument, or rather cannot understand what it is an argument about, the existence of others. So Shylock,
in noting his points of identity with other human beings in a series of
rhetorical questions, is allowing that others of course do know all of these
things about Jews — for example, about him; but he is denying (or further
reminding us not to conclude) that knowing such things about him is
knowing of his existence as a (an other) human being. Instead of asking
the others to conclude, on the basis of analogy, that he exists as a human
being, he is accusing them of using just this basis for just this purpose. He
is turning upon the condition of analogy itself. (Hume's Philo, in his
exasperation at the use, not at the invalidity, of an argument from analogy, does the same: "Why not become a perfect anthropomorphite? Why
not assert the deity or deities to be corporeal, and to have eyes, a nose,
mouth, ears, etc.?" (Dialogues, part V).) Shylock is saying: You people
think I am like you. So then you think I am also different. And what is
the difference? That my body is not associated with your sentience, that
is, not with a sentience of Christ. If it were, what would you have found?
That I am another you, made in your image. Well and good. I'll force you
to be a perfect narcissist. I will perfect the analogy of my image with
yours. I will take upon myself your sentience. — He, in effect, here prepares his punishment by conversion.
   It seems undeniable that the play rehearses the confrontation, or replacement, of the Old Law by the New. (So far as I know, Nevill Coghill
best expresses the idea in "The Basis of Shakesperean Comedy".) But
Shylock's claim, as befits a Jew, is that the replacement never took effect,
that the Christian's humility is merely a parody, or disguise, of the Jew's
Law, Christian mercy merely vengeance disguised with passiveness; hence
the Christian does not exist, Christianity never happened; the Messiah,
which the Christian learned from the Jew to expect, has not yet come, or
came to no effect. It is against the implication of this charge that punishment by conversion may be understood as specifically called for, used as
specific refutation.
   Shylock's speech upon analogy was prompted by the question, half
rhetorical, whether he will demand his promised pound of flesh. So his

=== p. 480 ===

speech, in affirming that he will, and in naming just this to be his revenge,
and in claiming revenge to perfect his analogy, or identification, with
Antonio, declares that he will be doing what has been done him. So he
is telling us that he perceives Antonio's refusal of acknowledgment as
mutilation — the denial, the destruction, of his intactness. His revenge
thus speaks: You think my sentience can be at best merely like yours; you
hedge mine. I'll show you that you can have exactly mine. And there is
also the suggestion: There is no proof for you that I am a man, that I am
flesh, until you know that you are flesh. For you to learn this will be my
better instruction.
    Of course it need not succeed. To Shylock's assertion "I say my daughter is my flesh and my blood", there is an answer: "There is more difference between thy flesh and hers, than between jet and ivory, more between
 your bloods, than there is between red wine and Rhenish" (III, i, 33-6).
And the last clause helps suggest that there is an answer to this answer:
 Then I'll make the flesh mine by using it for food (". . . it will feed my
 revenge"). I do not see that imagining a literal incorporation of the other
 is madder than attempting to literalize, as in a more academic overcoming
 of skepticism one is impelled to try to imagine doing, the having of another's feelings, the direction to which is not imagining incorporating
 them (which seems just a way of imagining having them, which you can
 certainly do, in an everyday sense) but rather allowing yourself to be
  (re)incorporated, to be the other.
     This is not, I think, as mad as things really get for Shylock. For where
 is the pound of flesh to come from? Where does Shylock wish it from?
 The question is pressed by the mysterious change from Shylock's original
  demand, to which Antonio agrees, that the forfeit be "cut off and taken/
  In which part of your body pleaseth me" (I, iii, 146-47), to the bond as
  read by Portia before the court, that the flesh "be by him cut off/ Nearest
  the merchant's heart" (IV, i, 228-29). I do not insist that Shylock's proof
  — his better instruction — that Antonio is his semblable was (and psychically remains) to carve Antonio into a Jew, i.e., to do to him what
  circumcision, in certain frames of mind, is imagined to do, i.e., to castrate.
  I insist merely that the question rouses our horrified wonder that a pound,
  wherever it be cut from, would result in so complete a disfigurement,
  amounting to metamorphosis; and that this should not, as part of the
   anxiety in experiencing this revenge satire, be glossed (over) by the presumption that the change of the pound's location must have been "[stipulated] when the bond was prepared" (Arden edition, note at IV, i, 229).
  We need not assume that any such change has been agreed upon if we

=== p. 481 ===

allow that a confusion of identities persists. For which merchant (of
Venice) is picked out by the phrase "nearest the merchant's heart"? If this
can be read as picking out Shylock, then it is equivalent to Shylock's
original demand for the part that "pleases" him. (Though the ambiguity
of the phrase may just be present even if a confusion of identities is not
raised.) I do not say that this is the correct reading; I ask that a spiritual
passage be conceived in which it is not known, especially in which Shylock
does not know, what is being asked, what his satisfaction requires (what
would constitute his "[having] the heart of him" (III, i, 117)); hence a passage in which the certainty of the others' professed knowledge of him is a
measure of his invisibility to them.

  A second, and an extended final illustration I choose, from which to
study the imagination of the body's fate under skepticism, are equally
familiar moments, and more or less familiar as a pair. I ask how it is
that we are to understand, at the height of The Winter's Tale, Hermione's
reappearance as a statue. Specifically I ask how it is that we are to understand Leontes's acceptance of the "magic" that returns her to flesh and
blood, and hence to him. This is a most specific form of resurrection.
Accepting it means accepting the idea that she had been turned to stone;
that that was the right fate for her disappearance from life. So I am asking
for the source of Leontes's conviction in the Tightness of that fate. Giving
the question that form, the form of my answer is by now predictable: for
her to return to him is for him to recognize her; and for him to recognize
her is for him to recognize his relation to her; in particular to recognize
what his denial of her has done to her, hence to him. So Leontes recognizes the fate of stone to be the consequence of his particular skepticism.
One can see this as the projection of his own sense of numbness, of living
death. But then why was this his fate? It is a most specific form of remorse
or of (self-)punishment.
   Its environment is a tale of harrowing by jealousy, and a consequent
accusation of adultery, an accusation known by every outsider, everyone
but the accuser, to be insanely false. Hence Leontes is inevitably paired
with Othello. I call attention to two further ways in which The Winter's
Tale is a commentary upon Othello, and therefore contrariwise. First,
both plays involve a harrowing of the power of knowing the existence of
another (as chaste, intact, as what the knower knows his other to be).
Leontes refuses to believe a true oracle, Othello insists upon believing a
false one. Second, in both plays the consequence for the man's refusal of

=== p. 482 ===

4°2              SKEPTICISM AND THE PROBLEM OF OTHERS

knowledge of his other is an imagination of stone. It is not merely an
appetite for beauty that produces Othello's most famous image of his
victim, as a piece of cold and carved marble (". . . whiter skin of hers
than snow,/ And smooth, as monumental alabaster" (V, ii, 4-5)). Where
does his image come from?
   To introduce what I have to say about Othello, I want to give a final
source for thinking of tragedy as a kind of epistemological problem, or
as the outcome of the problem of knowledge — of the dominance of
modern philosophical thought by it. (Cf. "The Avoidance of Love", pp.
320-26.) When I said just now that I wished "to understand how the
other now bears the weight of God, shows me that I am not alone in the
universe", I was claiming to be giving a certain derivation for the problem of the other. But I was also echoing one formulation Descartes gives
his motive in wanting to find what is beyond doubt, viz., to know beyond
doubt that he is not alone in the world (third Meditation). Now I ask, in
 passing but explicitly, why it is Descartes does not try to defeat that possibility of isolation in what would seem (to whom?) the most direct and
 the surest way, by locating the existence of one other finite being.
    He says simply that he can easily imagine that ideas "which represent
men similar to myself" could be "formed by the combination of my other
ideas, of myself, of corporeal objects, and of God, even though outside of
 me there were no other men in the world . . .". He is setting up, of
 course, a powerful move toward God. And we can gather from this, something that seems borne out in the sequel of his Meditations, that the
 problem of others (other finite beings) is not discovered, or derived, by
 Descartes to be a special problem of knowledge; this is surely one reason
 it would not have been discovered to be such in subsequent epistemology.
 But the more one meditates upon the unique place Descartes makes for
 his relation to his own body, the less clear and distinct it is that he has
 available to himself the formulation of the idea of another body as having
 a unique relation to its mind in that special quasi-substantial way that he
 asserts is not like the way a ship is related to its pilot. But without such
 an idea what is the content of the idea of "men similar to myself"? I do
 not conceive of Descartes's appealing to the route of analogy here, since
 he must be far surer that other human bodies go with minds than any
 sureness he can extract by inferring from another body's behavior alone.
 After all, the body has essentially nothing to do with the soul! I might express his difficulty as follows. His sense of himself as composed of his contrary natures (of what he means by mind and body, the one characterized
 in opposition to the other, each essentially what the other is not) is the

=== p. 483 ===

idea of a double nature, symbolized centrally in the culture we share with
him (but perhaps now only in literature) as the figure of Christ. So the
thing of incarnation, the mysterious meeting of heaven and earth, occurs
in Descartes's thought not alone in the inspirer of Christianity but in each
individual human being. From here you may conclude that the human
problem in recognizing other human beings is the problem of recognizing
another to be Christ for oneself. (What is the significance of the charge
that Descartes proves the existence at best of a philosopher's God?)
   In the light of this passing of the question of the other, a change is noticeable in the coda Descartes supplies his argument at the end of this
third Meditation:
The whole force of the argument I have here used to prove the existence of God
consists in the fact that I recognize that it would not be possible for my nature
to be what it is, possessing the idea of a God, unless God really existed — the
same God, I say, the idea of whom I possess, the God who possesses all these
high perfections . . . [who] cannot be a deceiver. . . .
The main point of summary is that I could not have produced the idea I
have of God, for it can have come from nothing less than God himself.
But a new note of necessity is also struck, that without the presence of
this idea in myself, and (hence) the presence of the fact of which it is
the imprint, my own nature would necessarily not be what it is. (Nietzsche's idea of the death of God can be understood to begin by saying
roughly or generally as much: the idea of God is part of (the idea of)
human nature. If that idea dies, the idea of human nature equally dies.)
So not only the fact, as it were, of my existence, but the integrity of it,
depends upon this idea. And so these meditations are about the finding of
self-knowledge after all; of the knowledge of a human self by a human
self.
   That the integrity of my (human, finite) existence may depend on the
fact and on the idea of another being's existence, and on the possibility
of proving that existence; an existence conceived from my very dependence and incompleteness, hence conceived as perfect, and conceived as
producing me "in some sense, in [its] own image"; these are thoughts that
take me to a study of Othello.
   Briefly, to begin with, we have the logic, the emotion, and the scene of
skepticism epitomized. The logic: "My life upon her faith" (I, iii, 294)
and ". . . when I love thee not/ Chaos is come again" (III, iii, 91-92)
set up the stake necessary to best cases; the sense I expressed by the imaginary major premiss, "If I know anything, I know this". One standing
issue about the rhythm of Othello's plot is that the progress from the

=== p. 484 ===

completeness of Othello's love to the perfection of his doubt is too precipitous for the fictional time of the play. But such precipitousness is just
the rhythm of skepticism; all that is necessary is the stake. The emotion:
Here I mean not Othello's emotion toward Desdemona, call it jealousy;
but the structure of his emotion as he is hauled back and forth across the
keel of his love. Othello's enactment, or sufferance, of that torture is the
most extraordinary representation known to me of the "astonishment" in
skeptical doubt. In Descartes's first Meditation: "I realize so clearly that
there are no conclusive indications by which waking life can be distinguished from sleep that I am quite astonished, and my bewilderment is
such that it is almost able to convince me that I am sleeping." (It does not
follow that one is convinced that one is awake.) When Othello loses consciousness ("Is't possible? —Confess? —Handkerchief? — O devil!"
(IV, i, 42-43)), it is not from conviction in a piece of knowledge but in an
effort to stave the knowledge off. The scene: Here I have in mind the
pervasive air of the language and the action of this play as one in which
Othello's mind continuously outstrips reality, dissolves it in trance or
dream or in the beauty or ugliness of his incantatory imagination; in
which he visualizes possibilities that reason, unaided, cannot rule out.
Why is he beyond aid? Why are the ear and the eye in him disjoined? We
know that by the time he formulates his condition this way:

                                                       By the world,
              I think my wife be honest, and think she is not,
              I think that thou are just, and think thou are not;
              I'll have some proof . . .

he is lost. Two dozen lines earlier he had demanded of lago "the ocular
proof", a demand which was no purer a threat than it was a command, as
if he does indeed wish for this outcome, as if he has a use for lago's suspicions, hence a use for lago that reciprocates lago's use of him. Nothing
I claim about the play here will depend on an understanding of the relation between lago and Othello, so I will simply assert what is suggested
by what I have just said, that such a question as "Why does Othello
believe lago?" is badly formed. It is not conceivable that Othello believes
lago and not Desdemona. lago, we might say, offers Othello an opportunity to believe something, something to oppose to something else he
knows. What does he know? Why does it require opposition? — What
do we know?
   We have known (say since G. Wilson Knight's "The Othello Music")

=== p. 485 ===

that Othello's language, call it his imagination, is at once his, and the
play's, glory, and his shame, the source of his power and of his impotence;
or we should have known (since Bradley's Shakespearean Tragedy) that
Othello is the most romantic of Shakespeare's heros, which may be a way
of summarizing the same facts. And we ought to attend to the perception
that Othello is the most Christian of the tragic heros (expressed in
Norman Rabkin's Shakespeare and the Common Understanding). Nor is
there any longer any argument against our knowledge that Othello is
black; and there can be no argument with the fact that he has just married, nor with the description, compared with the cases of Shakespeare's
other tragedies, that this one is not political but domestic.
   We know more specifically, I take it, that Othello's blackness means
something. But what specifically does it mean? Mean, I mean, to him —
for otherwise it is not Othello's color that we are interested in but some
generalized blackness, meaning perhaps "sooty" or "filthy", as elsewhere
in the play. This difference may show in the way one takes Desdemona's
early statement: "I saw Othello's visage in his mind" (I, iii, 252). I think
it is commonly felt that she means she overlooked his blackness in favor
of his inner brilliance; and perhaps further felt that this is a piece of
deception, at least of herself. But what the line more naturally says is that
she saw his visage as he sees it, that she understands his blackness as he
understands it, as the expression (or in his word, his manifestation) of his
mind — which is not overlooking it. Then how does he understand it?
   As the color of a romantic hero. For he, as he was and is, manifested by
his parts, his title, and his "perfect soul" (I, ii, 31), is the hero of the tales
of romance he tells, some ones of which he wooed and won Desdemona
with, others of which he will die upon. It is accordingly the color of one
of enchanted powers and of magical protection, but above all it is the
color of one of purity, of a perfect soul. Desdemona, in entering his life,
hence in entering his story of his life, enters as a fit companion for such a
 hero; his perfection is now opened toward hers. His absolute stake in his
 purity, and its confirmation in hers, is shown in what he feels he has lost
 in losing Desdemona's confirmation:

                                . . . my name, that was as fresh
                   As Dian's visage, is now begrim'd, and black
                   As mine own face. . . .

Diana's is a name for the visage Desdemona saw to be in Othello's mind.
He loses its application to his own name, his charmed self, when he no

=== p. 486 ===

longer sees his visage in Desdemona's mind but in lago's, say in the
world's capacity for rumor. To say he loses Desdemona's power to confirm
his image of himself is to say that he loses his old power of imagination.
And this is to say that he loses his grasp of his own nature; he no longer
has the same voice in his history. So then the question becomes: How has
he come to displace Desdemona's imagination by lago's? However terrible
the exchange, it must be less terrible than some other. Then we need to
ask not so much how lago gained his power as how Desdemona lost hers.
    We know — do we not? — that Desdemona has lost her virginity, the
protection of Diana, by the time she appears to us. And surely Othello
knows this! But this change in her condition, while a big enough fact to
hatch millennia of plots, is not what Othello accuses her of. (Though
would that accusation have been much more unfair than the unfaithfulness he does accuse her of?) I emphasize that I am assuming in Othello's
mind the theme and condition of virginity to carry their full weight
within a romantic universe. Here is some recent Northrop Frye on the
subject: "Deep within the stock convention of virgin-baiting is a vision
of human integrity imprisoned in a world it is in but not of, often forced
by weakness into all kinds of ruses and stratagems, yet always managing
 to avoid the one fate which really is worse than death, the annihilation
of one's identity. . . . What is symbolized as a virgin is actually a human
conviction, however expressed, that there is something at the core of one's
infinitely fragile being which is not only immortal but has discovered the
secret of invulnerability that eludes the tragic hero" (The Secular Scripture, p. 86).
    Now let us consolidate what we know on this sketch so far. We have to
 think in this play not merely about marriage but about the marriage of a
 romantic hero and of a Christian man; one whose imagination has to
 incorporate the idea of two becoming one in marriage and the idea that
 it is better to marry than to burn. It is a play, though it is thought of as
 domestic, in which not a marriage but an idea of marriage, or let us say
 an imagination of marriage, is worked out. "Why did I marry?" is the
 first question Othello asks himself to express his first raid of suspicion
 (III, iii, 246). The question has never been from his mind. lago's first
 question to him is "Are you fast married?", and Othello's first set speech
 ends with something less than an answer: "But that I love the gentle
 Desdemona,/ I would not my unhoused free condition/ Put into circumscription and confine/ For the sea's worth." Love is at most a necessary
 not a sufficient condition for marrying. And for some minds, a certain idea

=== p. 487 ===

of love may compromise as much as validate the idea of marriage. It may
be better, but it is not perfect to marry, as St. Paul implies.
  We have, further, to think in this play not merely generally of marriage
but specifically of the wedding night. It is with this that the play opens.
The central of the facts we know is that the whole beginning scene takes
place while Othello and Desdemona are in their bridal bed. The simultaneity is marked: "Even now, very now, an old black ram/ Is tupping
your white ewe . . ." (I, i, 88). And the scene is one of treachery, alarms,
of shouts, of armed men running through a sleeping city. The conjunction
of the bridal chamber with a scene of emergency is again insisted on by
Othello's reappearance from his bedroom to stop a brawl with his single
presence; a reappearance repeated the first night in Cyprus. As though an
appearance from his place of sex and dreams is what gives him the power
to stop an armed fight with a word and a gesture. — Or is this more than
we know? Perhaps the conjunction is to imply that their "hour of love"
(I, iii, 298-99), or their two hours, have each been interrupted. There is
reason to believe that the marriage has not been consummated, anyway
reason to believe that Othello does not know whether it has. What is
lago's "Are you fast married?" asking? Whether a public, legal ceremony
has taken place or whether a private act; or whether the public and the
private have ratified one another? Othello answers by speaking of his
nobility and his love. But apart from anything else this seems to assume
that lago's "you" was singular, not plural. And what does Othello mean
in Cyprus by these apparently public words?:

                                      . . . come, my dear love,
                 The purchase made, the fruits are to ensue,
                 The profit's yet to come 'twixt me and you.
                                                  [II, iii, 8-10]

What is the purchase and what the fruits or profit? Othello has just had
proclaimed a general celebration at once of the perdition of the Turkish
fleet and of his nuptials (II, ii). If the fruits and profit are the resumption
of their privacy then the purchase was the successful discharge of his
public office and his entry into Cyprus. But this success was not his doing;
it was provided by a tempest. Is the purchase their (public) marriage?
Then the fruits and profit are their conjugal love. Then he is saying that
this is yet to come. It seems to me possible that the purchase, or price, was
her virginity, and the fruits or profit their pleasure. There could hardly
be greater emphasis on their having had just one shortened night to-

=== p. 488 ===

gather, isolated from this second night by a tempest (always in these matters symbolic, perhaps here of a memory, perhaps of an anticipation). Or
is it, quite simply, that this is something he wishes to say publicly, whatever the truth between them? (How we imagine Desdemona's reaction to
this would then become all important.)
    I do not think that we must, nor that we can, choose among these
possibilities in Othello's mind. On the contrary, I think Othello cannot
choose among them. My guiding hypothesis about the structure of the
play is that the thing denied our sight throughout the opening scene; the
thing, the scene, that lago takes Othello back to again and again, retouching it for Othello's enchafed imagination; is what we are shown in the
final scene, the scene of murder. This becomes our ocular proof of
Othello's understanding of his two nights of married love. (It has been
 felt from Thomas Rymer to G. B. Shaw that the play obeys the rhythm
 of farce, not of tragedy. One might say that in beginning with a sexual
 scene denied our sight, this play opens exactly as a normal comedy closes,
 as if turning comedy inside out.) I will follow out this hypothesis here
 only to the extent of commenting on that final scene.
     However one seeks to interpret the meaning of the great entering speech
 of the scene ("It is the cause, it is the cause, my soul. . . . Put out the
 light, and then put out the light" . . .), I cannot take its mysteries, its
 privacies, its magniloquence, as separate from some massive denial to
 which these must be in service. Othello must mean that he is acting impersonally, but the words are those of a man in a trance, in a dream-state,
 fighting not to awaken; willing for anything but light. By "denial" I do
 not initially mean something requiring psychoanalytical, or any other,
  theory. I mean merely to ask that we not, conventionally but insufferably,
assume that we know this woman better than this man knows her — making Othello some kind of exotic, gorgeous, superstitious lunkhead; which
 is about what lago thinks. However much Othello deserves each of these
  titles, however far he believes lago's tidings, he cannot just believe them;
 somewhere he also knows them to be false. This is registered in the rapidity
  with which he is brought to the truth, with no further real evidence, with
  only a counter-story (about the handkerchief) that bursts over him, or
  from him, as the truth. Shall we say he recognizes the truth too late? The
  fact is, he recognizes it when he is ready to, as one alone can; in this case,
  when its burden is dead. I am not claiming that he is trying not to believe
  lago, or wants not to believe what lago has told him. (This might describe
  someone who, say, had a good opinion of Desdemona, not someone whose
  life is staked upon hers.) I am claiming that we must understand Othello,

=== p. 489 ===

on the contrary, to want to believe lago, to be trying, against his knowledge, to believe him. Othello's eager insistence on lago's honesty, his eager
slaking of his thirst for knowledge with that poison, is not a sign of his
stupidity in the presence of poison but of his devouring need of it. I do
not quite say that he could not have accepted slander about Desdemona
so quickly, to the quick, unless he already believed it; but rather that it is
a thing he would rather believe than something yet more terrible to his
mind; that the idea of Desdemona as an adulterous whore is more convenient to him than the idea of her as chaste. But what could be more
terrible than Desdemona's faithlessness? Evidently her faithfulness. But
how?
   Note that in taking Othello's entering speech as part of a ritual of
denial, in the context of taking the murder scene as a whole to be a
dream-enactment of the invisible opening of the play, we have an answer
implied to our original question about this play, concerning Othello's
turning of Desdemona to stone. His image denies that he scarred her and
shed her blood. It is a denial at once that he has taken her virginity and
that she has died of him. (But it is at the same time evidence that in suffering the replacement of the problem of God by the problem of the other
this man has turned both objects into stone, so that we might at this moment understand his self-interpretation to be that of an idolater, hence religiously as well as socially to be cast out.) The whole scene of murder is
built on the concept of sexual intercourse or orgasm as a dying. There is
a dangerously explicit quibble to this effect in the exchange,

                       Oth. Thou art on thy death bed.
                       Des. Ay, but not yet to die.

The possible quibble only heightens the already heartbreaking poignance
of the wish to die in her marriage bed after a long life.
   Though Desdemona no more understands Othello's accusation of her
than, in his darkness to himself, he does, she obediently shares his sense
that this is their final night and that it is to be some dream-like recapitulation of their former two nights. This shows in her premonitions of
death (the Willow Song, and the request that one of the wedding sheets
be her shroud) and in her mysterious request to Emilia, ". . . tonight/
Lay on my bed our wedding sheets" (IV, ii, 106-07), as if knowing, and
faithful to, Othello's private dream of her, herself preparing the scene of
her death as Othello, utilizing lago's stage directions, imagines it must
happen ("Do it not with poison, strangle her in her bed, even the bed

=== p. 490 ===

she hath contaminated." "Good, good, the justice of it pleases, very good"
(IV, i, 203-5)); as if knowing that only with these sheets on their bed
can his dream of her be contested. The dream is of contamination. The
fact the dream works upon is the act of deflowering. Othello is reasonably
literal about this, as reasonable as a man in a trance can be:

                               . . . when I have pluck'd the rose,
                I cannot give it vital growth again,
                It must needs wither; I'll smell it on the tree,
                A balmy breath, that doth almost persuade
                Justice herself to break her sword: once more:
                Be thus, when thou art dead, and I will kill thee,
                And love thee after. . . .

(Necrophilia is an apt fate for a mind whose reason is suffocating in its
sumptuous capacity for figuration, and which takes the dying into love
literally to entail killing. "That death's unnatural, that kills for loving"
(V, ii, 41); or that turns its object to live stone. It is apt as well that Des-demona sense death, or the figure of death, as the impending cause of
death. And at the very end, facing himself, he will not recover from this.
"I kissed thee ere I killed thee." And after too. And not just now when
you died from me, but on our previous nights as well.)
   The exhibition of wedding sheets in this romantic, superstitious, conventional environment, can only refer to the practice of proving purity
by staining. — I mention in passing that this provides a satisfactory
weight for the importance Othello attaches to his charmed (or farcical)
handkerchief, the fact that it is spotted, spotted with strawberries.
    Well, were the sheets stained or not? Was she a virgin or not? The answers seem as ambiguous as to our earlier question whether they are fast
married. Is the final, fatal reenactment of their wedding night a clear
denial of what really happened, so that we can just read off, by negation,
what really happened? Or is it a straight reenactment, without negation,
and the flower was still on the tree, as far as he knew? In that case, who
was reluctant to see it plucked, he or she? On such issues, farce and
 tragedy are separated by the thickness of a membrane.
    We of course have no answer to such questions. But what matters is
that Othello has no answer; or rather he can give none, for any answer to
 the questions, granted that I am right in taking the questions to be his, is
intolerable. The torture of logic in his mind we might represent as follows: Either I shed her blood and scarred her or I did not. If I did not

=== p. 491 ===

then she was not a virgin and this is a stain upon me. If I did then
she is no longer a virgin and this is a stain upon me. Either way I am
contaminated. (I do not say that the sides of this dilemma are of equal significance for Othello.)
   But this much logic anyone but a lunkhead might have mastered apart
from actually getting married. (He himself may say as much when he asks
himself, too late, why he married.) Then what quickens this logic for
him? Call whatever it is lago. What is lago?
   He is everything, we know, Othello is not. Critical and witty, for example, where Othello is commanding and eloquent; retentive where the
other is lavish; concealed where the other is open; cynical where the
other is romantic; conventional where the other is original; imagines
flesh where the other imagines spirit; the imaginer and manager of the
human guise; the bottom end of the world. And so on. A Christian has to
call him devil. The single fact between Othello and lago I focus on here
is that Othello fails twice at the end to kill lago, knowing he cannot kill
him. This all but all-powerful chieftain is stopped at this nobody. It is
the point of his impotence, and the meaning of it. lago is everything
Othello must deny, and which, denied, is not killed but works on, like
poison, like Furies.
   In speaking of the point and meaning of Othello's impotence, I do not
think of Othello as having been in an everyday sense impotent with Des-demona. I think of him, rather, as having been surprised by her, at what
he has elicited from her; at, so to speak, a success rather than a failure. It
is the dimension of her that shows itself in that difficult and dirty banter
between her and lago as they await Othello on Cyprus. Rather than imagine himself to have elicited that, or solicited it, Othello would imagine it
elicited by anyone and everyone else. —Surprised, let me say, to find
that she is flesh and blood. It was the one thing he could not imagine for
himself. For if she is flesh and blood then, since they are one, so is he. But
then although his potency of imagination can command the imagination
of this child who is everything he is not, so that she sees his visage in his
mind, she also sees that he is not identical with his mind, he is more than
his imagination, black with desire, which she desires. lago knows it, and
Othello cannot bear what lago knows, so he cannot outface the way in
which he knows it, or knows anything. He cannot forgive Desdemona for
existing, for being separate from him, outside, beyond command, commanding, her captain's captain.
   It is an unstable frame of mind which compounds figurative with literal
dying in love; and Othello unstably projects upon her, as he blames her:

=== p. 492 ===

                 O perjur'd woman, thou dost stone thy heart
                 And makest me call what I intend to do
                 A murder, which I thought a sacrifice.
As he is the one who gives out lies about her, so he is the one who will
give her a stone heart for her stone body, as if in his words of stone which
confound the figurative and the literal there is the confounding of the incantations of poetry and of magic. He makes of her the thing he feels
(". . . my heart is turned to stone" (IV, i, 178)), but covers the ugliness of
his thought with the beauty of his imagery — a debasement of himself
and of his art of words. But what produces the idea of sacrifice? How did
he manage the thought of her death as a sacrifice? To what was he to
sacrifice her? To his image of himself and of her, to keep his image intact,
uncontaminated; as if this were his protection from slander's image of
him, say from a conventional view of his blackness. So he becomes conventional, sacrificing love to convention. But this was unstable; it could
not be said. Yet better thought than the truth, which was that the central
sacrifice of romance has already been made by them: her virginity, her intactness, her perfection, had been gladly forgone by her for him, for the
sake of their union, for the seaming of it. It is the sacrifice he could not
accept, for then he was not himself perfect. It must be displaced. The
scar is the mark of finitude, of separateness; it must be borne whatever
one's anatomical condition, or color. It is the sin or the sign of refusing
 imperfection that produces, or justifies, the visions and torments of devils
 that inhabit the region of this play.
    If such a man as Othello is rendered impotent and murderous by
 aroused, or by having aroused, female sexuality; or let us say: if this man
 is horrified by human sexuality, in himself and in others; then no human
 being is free of this possibility. What I have wished to bring out is the
 nature of this possibility, or the possibility of this nature, the way human
 sexuality is the field in which the fantasy of finitude, of its acceptance and
 its repetitious overcoming, is worked out; the way human separateness is
turned equally toward splendor and toward horror, mixing beauty and
 ugliness; turned toward before and after; toward flesh and blood.
    — But Othello certainly knows that Desdemona exists! So what has his
 more or less interesting condition to do with skepticism? — [I knew you
 were still there. This is the last time we can meet like this.] In what
 spirit do you ask that question? I too am raising it. I wish to keep suspicion cast on what it is we take to express skepticism, and here especially
 by casting suspicion on whether we know what it means to know that an-

=== p. 493 ===

other exists. Nothing could be more certain to Othello than that Des-demona exists; is flesh and blood; is separate from him; other. This is
precisely the possibility that tortures him. The content of his torture is the
premonition of the existence of another, hence of his own, his own as dependent, as partial. According to me further, his professions of skepticism
over her faithfulness is a cover story for a deeper conviction; a terrible
doubt covering a yet more terrible certainty, an unstatable certainty. But
then this is what I have throughout kept arriving at as the cause of skepticism — the attempt to convert the human condition, the condition of
humanity, into an intellectual difficulty, a riddle. (To interpret "a metaphysical finitude as an intellectual lack" ("Knowing and Acknowledging",
p. 263).)
   Tragedy is the place we are not allowed to escape the consequences, or
price, of this cover: that the failure to acknowledge a best case of the
other is a denial of that other, presaging the death of the other, say by
stoning, or by hanging; and the death of our capacity to acknowledge as
such, the turning of our hearts to stone, or their bursting. The necessary
reflexiveness of spiritual torture. — But at any rate Othello is hardly in
doubt that he can ever know whether Desdemona is, for example, in pain
(perhaps suffering heartache), and for that reason in doubt that she exists;
so again his problem cannot match the skeptical one. — But I ask again:
Do we know what it is to be in such a doubt? and know this better than
we know how to think of Othello's doubt? Moreover, is it even clear
what it would mean to say that Othello does not doubt matters of Des-demona's consciousness such as that she has, or may have, some easily
describable pain? If what he imagines is that she is stone, then can he imagine that she is in pain? ("Gould one imagine a stone's having consciousness? And if anyone can do so — why should that not merely prove that
such image-mongery is of no interest to us?" (Investigations, §390).)
    Is the cover of skepticism — the conversion of metaphysical finitude
into intellectual lack — a denial of the human or an expression of it? For
 of course there are those for whom the denial of the human is the human.
 (Cf. "Aesthetic Problems of Modern Philosophy", p. 96.) Call this the
 Christian view. It would be why Nietzsche undertook to identify the task
 of overcoming the human with the task of overcoming the denial of the
 human; which implies overcoming the human not through mortification
 but through joy, say ecstasy. If the former can be thought of as the denial
 of the body then the latter may be thought of as the affirmation of the
 body. Then those who are pushed, in attempting to counter a dualistic
 view of mind and body, to assert the identity of body and mind, are again

=== p. 494 ===

skipping or converting the problem. For suppose my identity with my
body is something that exists only in my affirmation of my body. (As
friendship may exist only in loyalty to it.) Then the question is: What
would the body become under affirmation? What would become of me?
Perhaps I would know myself as, take myself for, a kind of machine; perhaps as a universe.
   I conclude with two thoughts, or perspectives, from which to survey
one's space of conviction in the reading I have started of Othello, and
from which perhaps to guide it further.
   First, what you might call the philosophy or the moral of the play
seems all but contained in the essay Montaigne entitles "On some verses
of Virgil", in such a remark as: "What a monstrous animal to be a horror
to himself, to be burdened by his pleasures, to regard himself as a misfortune!" The essay concerns the compatibility of sex with marriage, of
sex with age; it remarks upon, and upon the relations among, jealousy,
chastity, imagination, doubts about virginity; upon the strength of language and the honesty of language; and includes mention of a Turk and
of certain instances of necrophilia. One just about runs through the topics
of Othello if to this essay one adds Montaigne's early essay "Of the power
of imagination", which contains a Moor and speaks of a king of Egypt
who, finding himself impotent with his bride threatened to kill her, thinking it was some sort of sorcery. The moral would be what might have
been contained in Othello's ". . . one that lov'd not wisely, but too well",
that all these topics should be food for thought and moderation, not for
 torture and murder; as fit for rue and laughter as for pity and terror;
 that they are not tragic unless one makes them so, takes them so; that we
are tragic in what we take to be tragic; that one must take one's imperfections with a "gay and sociable wisdom" (in "Of experience", Montaigne's
 final essay) not with a somber and isolating eloquence. It is advice to accept one's humanity, and one can almost see lago as the slanderer of human nature (this would be his diabolism) braced with Othello as the en-acter of the slander — the one thinking to escape human nature from
 below, the other from above. But to whom is the advice usable? And how
 do we understand why it cannot be taken by those in directest need of it?
 The urging of moderation is valuable only to the extent that it results
 from a knowledge of the human possibilities beyond its urging. Is Mon-taigne's attitude fully earned, itself without a tint of the wish for exemption from the human? Or is Shakespeare's topic of the sheets and the
 handkerchief understandable as a rebuke to Montaigne, for refusing a
 further nook of honesty? A bizarre question, I suppose; but meant only

=== p. 495 ===

to indicate how one might, and why one should, test whether my emphasis on the stain is necessary to give sufficient weight to one's experience of
the horror and the darkness of these words and actions, or whether it is
imposed.
   My second concluding thought is more purely speculative, and arises in
response to my having spoken just now of "the refusal of imperfection"
as producing "the visions and torments of devils that inhabit the region
of this play". I do not wish to dispute the evidence marshalled by Bernard
Spivack in his Shakespeare and the A llegory of Evil showing lago to be a
descendent of the late morality figure of the Vice. I mean rather to help
explain further the appearance of that figure in this particular play, and,
I guess, to suggest its humanizing, or human splitting off (the sort of interpretation Spivack's book seems to deplore). It is against the tradition
of the morality play that I now go on to call attention — I cannot think I
am the first to say it out loud — to the hell and the demon staring out of
the names of Othello and Desdemona. I mention this curiosity to prepare
something meant as a nearly pure conjecture, wishing others to prove it
one way or another, namely that underlying and shaping the events
of this play are certain events of witch trials. Phrases such as "the ocular proof" and ". . . cords, or knives/ Poison, or fire, or suffocating
streams . . ." (Ill, iii, 394-95) seem to me to call for location in a setting of judicial torture. And I confess to finding myself thinking of Desde-mona's haunting characterization of a certain conception of her as "a
moth of peace" when I read, from an 1834 study called Folk-lore of the
NE of Scotland, "In some parts of Scotland moths are called 'witches' "
(quoted in Kittredge, Witchcraft in Old and New England). But what
prompts my thought primarily is the crazed logic Othello's rage for proof
and for "satisfaction" seems to require (like testing for a woman's witchcraft by seeing whether she will drown, declaring that if she does she was
innocent but if she does not she is to be put to death for a witch): What
happened on our wedding night is that I killed her; but she is not dead;
therefore she is not human; therefore she must die. ("Yet she must die,
else she'll betray more men" (V, ii, 6).) Again he claims not to be acting
personally, but by authority; here he has delivered a sentence. I recall
that the biblical justification for the trial of witches was familiarly from
the punishments in Exodus: "Thou shall not suffer a witch to live."
Othello seems to be babbling the crazed logic as he falls into his explicit
faint or trance: "First, to be hanged, and then to confess; I tremble at it"
(IV, i, 38-39), not knowing whether he is torturer or victim.
   I introduced the idea of the trial for witchcraft as a conjecture, mean-

=== p. 496 ===

ing immediately that it is not meant as a hypothesis: I do not require it
for any interpretative alignment of my senses with the world of this play.
It is enough, without supposing Shakespeare to have used literal subtexts
of this sort, that the play opens with a public accusation of witchcraft,
and an abbreviated trial, and is then succeeded with punctuating thoughts
of hell and by fatal scenes of psychological torture, and concludes with
death as the proof of mortality, i.e., of innocence (cf. "If that thou be'st
a devil, I cannot kill thee" (V, ii, 383)). Enough, I mean, to stir the same
depths of superstition — of a horror that proposes our lack of certain access to other minds — that under prompting institutions caused trials for
witchcraft. Othello is at once, as we would expect of what we call Shake-speare's humanity, an examination of the madness and bewitchment of
inquisitors, as well as of the tortures of love; of those tortures of which
 both victim and torturer are victims.
    So they are there, on their bridal and death sheets. A statue, a stone, is
 something whose existence is fundamentally open to the ocular proof. A
 human being is not. The two bodies lying together form an emblem of
 this fact, the truth of skepticism. What this man lacked was not certainty.
 He knew everything, but he could not yield to what he knew, be commanded by it. He found out too much for his mind, not too little. Their
 differences from one another — the one everything the other is not —
 form an emblem of human separation, which can be accepted, and granted,
 or not. Like the separation from God; everything we are not.
    So we are here, knowing they are "gone to burning hell", she with a lie
 on her lips, protecting him, he with her blood on him. Perhaps Blake has
 what he calls songs to win them back with, to make room for hell in a
 juster city. But can philosophy accept them back at the hands of poetry?
 Certainly not so long as philosophy continues, as it has from the first, to
 demand the banishment of poetry from its republic. Perhaps it could if it
 could itself become literature. But can philosophy become literature and
 still know itself?

