=== chunk: cavell-1979-claim-of-reason/ch13c-living-skepticism-asymmetries ===
title: Living skepticism, asymmetries, Friend and Confessor
source_pdf: docs/sources/cavell-1979-claim-of-reason/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 464-489
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 437
plan_page_end: 462
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 437 ===

view outcasts as beings different from oneself, about whose good they themselves did not require consulting; an attitude that might be called emotional imperialism. And they perceived this view or attitude as compromising the humanitarian's own humanity. The hand handing out its alms
can look like a fist. The problem of the humanitarian is not merely that
his acts of acknowledgment are too thin, mere assuagings of guilt; but that
they are apt, even bound, to confusion. His intention is to acknowledge
the outcast as a human being; but his effect is to treat a human being as
an outcast, as if the condition of outcastness defined a social role, a kind
of sub-profession, suited for a certain kind of human being. So it is apt
to perpetuate the guilt it means to assuage. The confusion is produced by
an avoidance of the two choices open to him: either to reveal himself as
one who casts out, or to cast himself out.
   One may feel that there are other choices. This means to me that one
will not have surmised a restriction upon one's humanity, or not surmised
that this restriction lies in the compromise of one's relations to others. For
the outcast is a mythological description of a position that no one could
be expected to want to be in. It makes my position appear artificial, arbitrary. It is not my fortune to be in a more fortunate position; the hand
of man shows in it; my hand; it rebukes my sense of fortune. The humanitarian is a mythological description of the posture in which I find
that my hand, if even in the form of a fist, is outstretched; that I find
myself related to the outcast; that I am exposed to his humanity.
   So far as we think that the human being is naturally a political being,
we cannot think that some human beings are naturally outcasts, naturally
in league with one another. So if there are outcasts, we must have, or
harbor, sub specie civilitatis, some explanation of their condition. One
explanation is that their condition is deserved. Another is that their
condition is undeserved but sheeiiy unfortunate, doomed or damned. Another is that the inhabitants of that condition are not quite or fully
human. Another is that they are mysteriously in league with one another.
Another is that my society is doomed or damned. Another is that my
society is unjust; but not sufficiently unjust to be doomed or damned.
— Whichever of these explanations one finds for oneself, surely all arise
 from a knowledge that there are other human beings in positions other
 than mine. All are arrived at on the basis of my empathic projection, such
 as it is, on the basis of what I regard it as sufficient for. I said there is no
general, everyday alternative to skepticism concerning other minds. Now
 I will say: I live my skepticism.
    With respect to the external world, I have to "forget", or ignore, close

=== p. 438 ===

my eyes to, somehow bypass, the presence of doubts that are not mine, of
"possibilities" that I have not ruled out; I have to permit myself distraction from my knowledge that we do not know what we all imagine there
is to know, viz., material objects. I accommodate myself to a universal
human condition, or rather, a condition shared by all creatures endowed
with sensuousness, a condition over which no one (possessing sensuousness) has a choice, save to be cautious. But the surmise that I have not
acknowledged about others, hence about myself, the thing there is to
acknowledge, that each of us is human, is not, first of all, the recognition
of a universal human condition, but first of all a surmise about myself.
To accommodate myself to my restrictions of acknowledgment would be
to compromise my integrity, or perhaps to constitute it, such as it is. It
is as a general alternative to skeptical doubt that Austin was moved to say
that, in substantiating my claims to know, "enough is enough"; I must
have said enough to rule out other reasonable, competing possibilities.
But how much is enough when it comes to knowing and acknowledging
 the humanity of another? How many times, and about just which matters,
must I pity another, help another, accept another's excuses, before concluding that enough is enough? "Give me another day; another moment;
 another dollar; another chance. . . ." If I do not answer such appeals, is
 this because I have found the other, this other, not to be worth it, or
 entitled to it, or myself not to be up to it?
    But surely there are limits to my answerability for or toward others?
 Surely there are reasonable grounds on which to draw those limits, or
 principles in terms of which to draw them? (This is a point of such an
 idea as that of the Social Contract. In respect of the State, it tells me that
 there are circumstances under which I am free to rebel, a time when
 enough is enough; but also tells me why I do not. In respect of my fellow
 citizens, it tells me why I am answerable for what happens to them; but
 also why my answerability is not unlimited.) But even if I draw the limits
 wrong, unfairly, or out of cowardice or spiritual stinginess or lack of imagination, how would this show a failure of my humanity? Surely anything I do shows the humanity in me, such as it is. The very way in which
 I ignore the other shows it. And if my response is mechanical, shows a
 tint of automatonity, then human beings are possessed of tints of automa-tonity. And if my response is quite inhuman, surely, as was said, only a
  human being can behave inhumanly. Such responses may well be judged
  to be failures of my humanity according to an ideal of the human being,
  and I have said that to be human is to have such an ideal. But my inhu-

=== p. 439 ===

man or automatonic treatment of the other does not itself prove that I
have no such ideal. — There is no way in which one shows oneself as
other to the other's outcastness. It depends upon the matter at hand. If
the other is Raskolnikov, then I can show my unrestricted acknowledgment of his humanity by understanding his confession and sharing his
exile. If the other is Estella then I can show that I believe her confession
that she is without a heart and ask to share that exile. In such cases, I
had better not have any other outstanding commitments. It may not
come to this. The question is still why my hand is ever stretched out, even
in the form of a fist. It shows that I want something of another. It shows
that I am exposed to my humanity.
   But even if we recognized some such surmise as that of a restriction on
my humanity arising from my inability —or the lack of occasion —to
acknowledge the other as a human being, surely this is not the same as
not knowing that others are humans? I do not know a confident answer
to this question, because I do not know that there is a confident answer
to the question, "How do I know that there are (other) human beings?".
I mean I do not know whether there is or is not a sensible answer to that
question; nor whether, if there is, it is the one that shows the knowledge
to be very special or nothing special. To accept my exposure in the case
of others seems to imply an acceptance of the possibility that my knowledge of others may be overthrown, even that it ought to be. With respect
to material objects we have to "forget" the possibility of skepticism, e.g.,
that the best case will fail us. With respect to other minds we might say
that we have to "remember" the possibility of skepticism, e.g., that we
have not permitted ourselves a best case, that we do not know but that
we may, at any place, be singled out; hence that, so far as we know, we
now are not. Our position is not, so far as we know, the best. — But
mightn't it be? Mightn't it be that just this haphazard, unsponsored state
of the world, just this radiation of relationships, of my cares and commitments, provides the milieu in which my knowledge of others can best be
expressed? Just this — say expecting someone to tea; or returning a favor;
waving goodbye; reluctantly or happily laying in groceries for a friend
with a cold; feeling rebuked, and feeling it would be humiliating to
admit the feeling; pretending not to understand that the other has taken
my expression, with a certain justice, as meaning more than I sincerely
wished it to mean; hiding inside a marriage; hiding outside a marriage —
just such things are perhaps the most that knowing others comes to, or
has come to for me. — Is there more for it to come to; more that it must

=== p. 440 ===

come to? When I alluded to Othello's conclusion as a failure of the best
case of acknowledgment, I equally cited it as his failure to recognize, in
time, that his (still) was a best case.
   In saying that we live our skepticism, I mean to register this ignorance
about our everyday position toward others — not that we positively know
that we are never, or not ordinarily, in best cases for knowing of the
existence of others, but that we are rather disappointed in our occasions
for knowing, as though we have, or have lost, some picture of what knowing another, or being known by another, would really come to — a harmony, a concord, a union, a transparence, a governance, a power — against
which our actual successes at knowing, and being known, are poor things.
To say that there is a skepticism which is produced not by a doubt about
whether we can know but by a disappointment over knowledge itself, and
 to say that this skepticism is lived in our knowledge of others, is to say
 that this disappointment has a history. To trace the history would presumably require tracing the hopes placed upon knowledge in the Renaissance and by the Enlightenment; and of the fears of knowledge overcome
 by those hopes; and of the despair of knowledge produced by the dashing
 of those hopes.

   The usefulness of these recent reflections concerning "living one's
skepticism" depends upon the convincingness of the way I painted the
skeptical recital and drew its moral, viz., in terms of one's exposure to
the other and to one's concept of the other. One suspicion about the
moral, or its surmise, lies in the sense that the idea that "others are owed
some unrestricted revelation of my humanity" is nothing more than a
pathological or adolescent or romantic sense of my own restriction or confinement; that it is merely a claim that 7 am not unrestrictedly known, a
condition I may and may not wish to have infringed; that it is a projection of some impossible wish, or possible need, for a proof of my existence.
   The most obvious cause for suspicion about the skeptical recital itself
is its concept of "empathic projection". This emerged as little more than
a dummy concept for something that must be the basis for my claims to
read the other, something that I go on in myself in adopting, or calling
upon, my attitude toward other human beings. Even so, I can see two
 suspicions over it. First: Isn't the wish for such a concept really a persistence of the idea that the other is "like" oneself, that whatever one can
 know about the other one first has to find in oneself and then read into
 the other (by analogy): whereas the essence of acknowledgment is that one

=== p. 441 ===

conceive the other from the other's point of view. Moreover, the concept
makes one's knowledge of the other seem to be something one engages in
afresh, as a special feat, in each case — not in each case of another, which
is fair enough; but in each case in which one undertakes to know another.
Whereas knowing others is, barring brain damage or some equal disaster,
just a fact about our capacities as knowers; others are, as it were, among
the items of our knowledge. If you wish to say that we have somehow to
get over to the other (or inside) then this is something already true of us
before a given other appears upon the scene. Once our general capacity
is settled, criteria are enough. Second: Doesn't the concept of empathic
projection make the idea of knowing others too special a project from the
beginning, as if the knowing of objects could take care of itself, whereas
what goes into the knowing of others is everything that goes into the
knowing of objects plus something else, something that, as it were, animates the object? It might in fact be the case that this is what knowledge
of others is like. But that would be an empirical claim, for which philosophers certainly have no particular evidence. It might also be true that this
is a fantasy of knowledge which we then project into the object of knowledge, thus producing the idea of the other as a material object plus something more.
    This idea of knowledge may indeed have the whole process of perception (of different strata or kinds of being) backwards. It makes equal sense
 — at least equal — to suppose that the natural (or, the biologically more
 primitive) condition of human perception is of (outward) things, whether
 objects or persons, as animated; so that it is the seeing of objects as
objects (i.e., seeing them objectively, as non-animated) that is the sophisticated development. One should accordingly regard the view of others as
 based upon empathic projection as a case of the Empathetic Fallacy.
    Or it makes the perception of humanity too special in another 'way. It
 seems to take the idea of an attitude toward a soul as some appropriateness of my response. But why shouldn't one say that there is a required
 appropriateness with respect to each breed of thing (object or being);
 something appropriate for bread, something else for stones, something for
 large stones that block one's path and something for small smooth stones
 that can be slung or shied; something for grass, for flowers, for orchards,
 for forests, for each fish of the sea and each fowl of the air; something for
 each human contrivance and for each human condition; and, if you like,
 on up? For each link in the Great Chain of Being there is an appropriate
 hook of response. I said that one's experience of others puts a seam in
 experience. Why not consider that experience is endlessly, continuously,

=== p. 442 ===

seamed? Every thing, and every experience of every different thing, is
what it is.
   Some of this, most of it, I would like to see worked out. I am interested,
for example, in the perception or vision of how different different things
are from one another. It points up the condition underlying the ease, call
it the naturalness, with which we name and know things; the condition
that, as one may feel, so few possibilities exist. The logical space is so vast
between kinds of objects; it is possible to think in natural kinds. (If everything that really could exist together did exist now (e.g., every kind of
tree, of every size and condition) then an Idealist vision of knowledge
would be true, that you could know (i.e., tell) no individual object without knowing everything about it, its whole truth; nothing less would
single out the kind it is.) Whereas human beings, by contrast, are all alike;
each bears an internal relation to all others. There is only one kind of
human being. This perception seems to me also to enter into our difficulty
in finding, or defining, a best case of the knowledge of others, which is
after all knowledge of the specifically human, or starts out to be. The
representativeness of the best case is not achieved here in a distinction
between specific and generic instances. There is no such distinction here,
or we must not allow one. So we are thrown back upon ourselves to ask
what makes one human being representative of (all) others.

   But at the moment what interests me is the suggestion, underlying both
suspicions about "empathic projection", that the skeptical recital was
overly specialized in its account of my knowledge of others. The suspicions call attention to the grossest, hitherto unremarked, feature of that
recital, viz., that it is directed to what I can know of another, not to what
others can know of me. It misses that duality in the problem of other
minds. — But obviously whether I can know of the existence of others
was just the problem, so far as there was a problem. — But the problem
is about otherness, and the way I was conceiving of it — as a question of
my knowing an other — was prejudicial, or partial, from the start, and so
perhaps harmful. It misses the following consideration: The question
whether there are other minds is exactly as much a question about me as
about anyone else. If anyone is an other mind, 7 am one — i.e., I am an
other to the others (and of course others are then I's to me). Then the
question is: Do others know of my existence?
   This seems a more promising beginning for an epistemological inquiry,
because here I begin with a case that I would say with confidence that I

=== p. 443 ===

know as well as I know anything. For surely / know I exist. Isn't this in
fact the "best case" for knowing of others that caused so much tribulation? — Come on. If you are going to speak in terms of others and I's,
then you do not know that you are an other unless you know that there
are other others, that is, other I's. You do not indeed otherwise so much
as know that you are an I, that saying "I" picks you out from among any
competitors. — I think I well may not be an I. I am I. But that aside, to
determine whether I can know that there are other others, i.e., other I's,
is what I mean the inquiry to do. Since I know I am (an) I, all I need in
order to know that I am (an) other (hence that there is an other) is to
know that I am known by an (other) I. — Where is the logical gain in
moving from the question whether I know another to the question
whether I am known by or to another? — If there is no logical loss, then
the gain of the question would lie in its posing more accurately what it is
we really want to know of others. And it would account for the intermittent emptiness in attempts to prove, or disprove, our knowledge of the
existence of others. Proofs for God's existence, and criticisms of these
proofs, are apt to be empty intermittently for people whose conviction is
that they are known by God, or to God, or not.
   Let us see what a beginning of a skeptical recital, directed passively,
brings to light.
   "Among the things we claim to know the existence of, some are human
beings. I know, for example, that each of you is a human being and each
of you knows — I devoutly hope — that I am a human being. But how do
you know this? What do you really know of me? You see a humanish
something of a certain height and age and gender and color and physiognomy, emitting vocables in a certain style. . . . Much more than this you
do not know. Some you could guess at, but not in very great detail. But
then I am a stranger to you. What does anyone know of me?
   "All anyone knows or could know is what I am able to show them of
myself. [This is not, at worst, false, but a definition of the relevant knowledge. I do not wish to deny that a great deal can be learned about me
from observation, say from an autopsy. I do not, that is, deny that I am a
thing, usable as cannon fodder. Nor do I deny that for some thinkers that
is enough to know about me — all there is (for them) to know.] And how
much can I really show? Of course I would not deny that if I evince criteria of pain then, unless I am very unfortunate, probably someone will
try to comfort me. And my doctor, for example, will not, unless he is sadistic, cause me more pain than he can help. But these are nothing more
than matters of fact, and the explanation for them may just be that pain-

=== p. 444 ===

behavior is biologically painful to behold, so beholders of it do what they
can to diminish it. The original case of pain-behavior, the infant's cry,
would be the clearest instance of this. Maybe, accordingly, all human
comfort arises (as the turning away of a flight of birds arises upon hearing
the sound of a member of their feather being strangled) merely from the
stimulus of certain behavior, i.e., certain outward criteria, not as a response to the experience itself. That remains, strictly, or directly, unknown.
    "Shouldn't I by now be suspicious of this very disappointment? What
else can I expect? [Here comes another Job's comforter, offering to replace
a natural disappointment with an even greater disappointment.] Nobody
else could have just this experience (striking myself on the breast). [Thus
is Wittgenstein's discussant at §253 a type (emerging at this stage of the
recital) of the passive skeptic.] And even if they could have it (i.e., have
something descriptively the same), they aren't (except per accidens) having
it when I am, so the other's knowledge of me is at best dependent on his
memory and hence on what has happened to him. And can I be sure that
anything that has happened to another is exactly the same as the thing
 that has happened to me? In the midst of pain maybe my metaphysical
scruples are dampened sufficiently to allow me to accept another's sympathy even when, later, I seriously doubt that he really knew how much
 my shoulder hurt. The very analogy he used for it — comparing my pain
 with the time he was hit with the baseball — shows he cannot have really
 appreciated the piercing quality of mine. — The other knows me merely
 by analogy — and that just is not knowing another mind! But I've already
 seen that nothing could be better than, could go beyond, analogy here!"
     Has this recital now prompted some stable conclusion? It seems that I
 ought to be entitled to draw the conclusion that I am, necessarily, imperfectly known. Anyway, strictly imperfectly, although of course for practical purposes the other knows well enough to provide help, even company
 (faute de mieux). Yet again, the recital seems to me to suggest that since I
 am unclear whether I am known in such a case, it is unclear what is to
 constitute knowing here.
     This unclarity may again be a function of some incompleteness in the
 recital, or some as yet undetected feature of it. But maybe it is the mere
  consequence of our not having yet assessed the natural fact underlying
  this unclarity, namely, that it is unclear to what extent I expect, or demand, in order to acknowledge being known, or to feel known, that another's experience is exactly (like) mine. Suppose someone said to me:
  "You don't feel so bad. I feel worse all the time than you do now." I

=== p. 445 ===

might believe him without taking him to have paid much attention to
the particular quality of my feeling; I might even think the particular
quality not to be of the essence. But this makes it almost seem that it is
up to me to decide whether somebody knows me!
    Or maybe the unclarity about what constitutes knowing in such cases
is merely caused as an artifact of the form of the (Cartesian) skeptical recital itself. In the original case, that of material objects, the skeptical conclusion to the effect that I do not know on the basis of the senses alone
arises unfailingly from an unquestioned employment of the obvious relation between knowing and seeing: having given seeing as the basis for
knowing, then if I have to concede that perhaps I do not see, see it, then
it follows that I do not, cannot claim to, know; period. But what, in the
case of other minds, modeled on this one of material objects, models this
relation between seeing and knowing? Surely not the transferred relation
between seeing and knowing themselves, for in the first format for active
 skepticism with respect to other minds the emergence of the need for such
a concept as empathic projection showed a natural dissatisfaction with
 seeing unadorned. (Not necessarily, of course, the right dissatisfaction.)
The relation between behavior and experience, then? This was the initial
idea when the Cartesian format first suggested itself (Chapter VI, the concluding section, entitled "A Further Problem"). There "I know 'from
 his behavior' " occurs at the place "I know 'from my senses' " occurs; and
 it seems that just as seeing fails as a basis for knowing upon accepting the
 hallucination or dreaming possibility, so behavior fails as a basis upon
 recognizing the simulation possibility.
    An immediate suspicion about the strength of this parallel should arise
 from the failure of behavior in an opposite direction. Not only may the
 other counterfeit behavior, the other may suppress behavior, in which
case I just in fact would not know, may as a matter of fact never know —
 not only not know what Caesar's feelings were on the field of the battle
 of Philippi, but not know what they were crossing the Rubicon, or looking for the last time into Egypt's or into Brutus's eyes. His feelings
 throughout his life are more or less mysterious, more or less a matter for
 speculation and elaboration. That such conclusions are acceptable to us
 intellectually, that they make sense of a possible intellectual position with
 respect to our knowledge of others, points to the following facts about the
 concept of behavior, in contrast to the concept of seeing — I mean, a contrast in their respective epistemological weights: to base your claim to
 knowledge of a thing on your having seen it is generally to stake full authority for your claim; whereas to base your claim to knowledge of a person

=== p. 446 ===

on that person's behavior is generally to withhold full authority from your
claim. Behavior is just made to contrast with something else that may tell
how it really is with a person. Nothing tells better than seeing how it is
with (sense-scale) things.

   In arriving at a plateau of uncertainty as to whether I am known, as to
what would count as being known, the recital of passive skepticism should
allow us to approach again, from the inside as it were, the matter of our
disappointment with criteria. The approach begins from the thought that
of course I know that my criteria (I mean the criteria I manifest) reach
all the way to — that is to say, reach directly out from — my experience itself; of course 7 know, that is to say, that the criteria I manifest are satisfied. But then how can the other not know? There seem just versions of
two old possibilities in view here: that I do not manifest the right criteria,
the ones that conventionally or naturally go with just this experience
(and here I am not worried about whether my experiences are themselves
like the experiences of others — I simply assume they are); or that the
other before whom I manifest the criteria cannot read them accurately. It
is reasonably clear that each of these two possibilities can be charged with
trading in some species of nonsense, on the ground that each denies some
feature essential to the idea (or hypothesis?) that criteria are in play: the
latter denies that humans are in the relevant sense in agreement; the former denies that I am a member of the human group. I can imagine that
someone would wish from here to make up an argument of the following
form: If these two possibilities are the genuine and exhaustive consequences of the surmise of passive skepticism — that I cannot perfectly
make myself known — then their successive collapse into nonsense proves
that the original surmise is also nonsense.
    The value or seriousness of this wish for an argument will depend on
how the nonsense is envisioned as made out. Because unless my sense of
inescapable unknownness also disappears with the collapsing of its "consequences", such an argument invites me to conclude that this sense of
 mine is merely psychological, hence without epistemological consequence.
And that, as at first, amounts to begging the skeptical question. It amounts
 to just assuming that a sense of inescapable unknownness must be caused
 by some individual psychological perplexity, perhaps an old knowledge of
 abandonment laid down in childhood, perhaps a conviction of isolation
 or rejection settled in adolescence. In any case, it is hardly something that
 can be taken as representative of the human condition generally, meta-

=== p. 447 ===

physically. Why, only children or adolescents themselves, who take their
problems for the world's problems, would so grossly confuse the contingent with the necessary! — But is that true? Prophets and messiahs and
certain romantic poets claim what is logically the same standing, to represent in themselves the human condition as such. Nowadays it is good form
to behave as though all prophets and messiahs must be false (while at the
same time it can hardly ever have been truer that no one giving himself
or herself out as a prophet is without a following). But whose problem is
that? —This representative function seems to be something Rousseau
established as the ambition of romantic artists; not directly one of self-dramatization (though it often comes to that) but one of self-generalization.
(Montaigne's project appears rather as one of self-individuation.) And as
for Rousseau there were the Encyclopedists, causing him and calumniating him, so for every later Rousseau there is an excerptor who would
reduce the claim of representativeness to its sources within a marginal
personality.
   I do not ask for conviction in the notion that passive skepticism repeats
the condition of prophecy — the singular knowledge of an unquestionable
truth which others are fated not to believe. But I cite the notion, here
near the end of my considerations of skepticism, to attract attention
again to the entwining of questions of skepticism with questions of sanity,
of philosophy and psychology. It is fundamental to skepticism with respect to material objects that a firm distinction be drawn between a lunatic and a reasonable doubt of the existence of things. It is equally
fundamental that this distinction cannot be firm enough, but that most
people — each person most of the time, in most moods — will be unable
to grasp it; so it will be said that such a doubt must be lunatic, from
which it would follow, according to my understanding of the matter, not
that skepticism is lunatic but that there is no skepticism. It is also fundamental to the mood in which one is captured by the skeptical surmise that
one descries the route of exit from the mood, that one sees as an alternative to this mood the joining again of the healthy, everyday world, outside the isolation of the — what? Study? Laboratory? Wilderness?
   My intuition that, on the contrary, I can live my skepticism with respect to other minds, is an intuition that there is no comparable, general
alternative to the radical doubt of the existence of others; that we may
already be as outside, in community, as we can be; that, accordingly, such
a doubt does not bear the same relation to the idea of lunacy. — But
isn't such an intuition empty on the face of it? Haven't you really been
saying that skepticism is inherently unlivable? Or anyway, not sanely

=== p. 448 ===

livable? — Well, I've said skepticism is inherently unshareable. — But
how do you mean that? You can't merely mean that a skeptic would be
metaphysically reluctant to share his tidings. You must mean that he
would feel that there is nothing to share. And isn't that fairly clearly insane? — But how do you mean that? Do you mean to question that skepticism can ever seriously (sanely) begin, that not even momentarily can
the skeptic's ground for doubt seem reasonable? Then we must begin all
over again. Or do you mean to say that the last question about skepticism
is a return of the first question, namely, and unrhetorically, How is skepticism possible?; and that finally what we ask for is an increasingly concrete study of the frames of mind in which skepticism appears and vanishes?
     — Suppose I accept this latter formulation. Then why not just give up
 the claim that, with respect to the existence of others, skepticism is in
 question? Grant, that is to say, that since our views of others can be lived
 it follows that these views are not pieces of skepticism. Then we will be
 free to investigate the frames of mind themselves in which we view one
  another. — But if the intuition expressed by saying that "skepticism with
 respect to others is (or can be) lived" is not empty — i.e., if there is such
  an intuition — then its content just is that (some dimension of) our lives
 with others, some frames of mind in which we view others, are to be characterized as skeptical, or rather, understood in terms forced upon us, or
  made available to us, in thinking through skepticism.
     Something very similar is what I want to say in formulating my abiding
  interest in material object skepticism — that what skepticism questions or
  denies my knowledge of is the world of objects I inhabit, is the world. As
  elsewhere, the abnormal provides our access to the normal. I recognize
  from the failure of what skepticism regards as my knowledge of objects
  what it is my everyday life with objects consists in. (This is what I have
  wished to mark, in "Knowing and Acknowledging" and in The Senses of
   Walden, as "the truth of skepticism".)
      So what is the difference in the way these directions of skepticism can
   be lived? Let us try another formula: To say I cannot "live" material object skepticism is to say that there is an alternative to its conclusion that
   I am bound, as a normal human being, to take. Accordingly, to say I
   (can) live skepticism with respect to others is to say that there is no such
   alternative, or no such conclusion.
      We have invoked an allegory of this idea of an alternative whenever
   we have spoken of the vanishing of skeptical doubt as a matter of "leaving
   the (philosophical) study" — an allegory in which I put aside my isolation

=== p. 449 ===

(hence find that I have myself put it on) and accept the company of others, rejoin their conventions, and share again their beliefs. But the allegory does not specify why "leaving" has the effect it has; or rather it does
not specify how I can leave nor what the effect is. Is the effect that I momentarily forget my skepticism because the charm of company distracts
me from it; and that, whenever the charm fades, I remember what I
learned in the study and suffer again the dashing of my spirits? If this is
how it is, then instead of taking this picture as one in which skepticism
oscillates with my life I can as readily take it as one in which this oscillation with skepticism occurs within my life. I need not behave insanely,
without surcease. For I sense, from within my isolation, that there is an
alternative to it; and I respect, or express, that isolating knowledge, when
outside, by saying, for example, that I know of the existence of the external world "for practical purposes". I do not, so far, have to be separated from others and treated as a lunatic. But if such things count as
living my skepticism then it is false that material object skepticism cannot be lived. Then what is left of the claim that there is a radical asymmetry between material object and other minds skepticism on just the
ground that the former cannot, and the latter can, be lived? Hasn't it just
collapsed?
   Since the claim — at any rate, the intuition — has not collapsed for me,
there must be a significant variation in the way living one's skepticism is
to be conceived in the different arenas. Immediately, it strikes me that
formulating the difference within and without my study as one in which I
remember and forget something, is not right, not the way things are. On
the contrary, I can remember perfectly well what went on in the study;
only it is not, as I feel like putting it, live for me now. To go over those
skeptical paths now, in my present circumstances, would seem "cold,
strained, and ridiculous". They are traversible only in meditation, a form
of thought which only the merely literary will take to be merely literary.
Apart from that access, I am not in the right study. If we can say that
outside the study the knowledge of skepticism is dead for us, then we
 might say that one can live skepticism so long as its knowledge is dead for
one. A dolorous intellectual diet. Yet to admit the dying of knowledge, as
 to endure the dying of love, as to succumb to the death of God and of
 poetry, may be all that fits one for rebirth.
   Again, I find that the need for invoking the qualification "for practical
 purposes" shows not that the study has been left but on the contrary
 shows that a genuine alternative to the isolation of the study has not been

=== p. 450 ===

45O              SKEPTICISM AND THE PROBLEM OF OTHERS

reached. We have not been offered our life with objects again — tempered
or chastened, if you like, by the revelation of skepticism; we have been
given a philosopher's description of that life, a falsifying or intellectualized picture of it. We are still inside the study, if not quite in the same
corner. The builder's knowledge of his column, the violinist's of her
hands and of her violin, the walker's of his body and of his ground, is not
limited by or to "practical purposes". What they know is what there is to
know about their several things; it is their life with things. — I do not
imagine that the qualification "for practical purposes" is tempting as a
philosopher's accommodation in the arena of other minds. It is no accommodation of common sense to the late fact that "all I can ever know
is the other's behavior" to say that I know of the existence of the consciousness of others for practical purposes. Such an accommodation would
seem crazier than the thing it is meant to accommodate. (And if we know
of, and know in service of, some such practical purposes, who taught us of
them? Machiavelli? Luther? de Sade? Adam Smith? Clausewitz?)
   Suppose someone (call him or her Polonius) thought to reassure us
about simulation possibilities once again: "True, people can feign being
in just about any psychological situation they can really be in. But although you cannot know with certainty whether an expression is counterfeit or genuine, for practical purposes it is good enough to treat all expressions as genuine. And true, some among the family of what we call
mankind may possibly be automata or androids of various kinds. But for
practical purposes we (ought to) treat all apparent humans as humans." I
might say that such remarks do not express our interest in others.
   And what is this interest? I can imagine that someone will take me to
harbor a more or less unexamined idea that humans are more important
 than objects in our lives, and that such a one may resist such an idea as
 follows: "Aren't you really taking it that our interest in objects is more
 or less uniform, as if this were the meaning of the discovery that makes
 skepticism possible — that no one's position is better than mine; that we
 are, as knowers, all in the same boat, our rocking common sensuous nature? And aren't we then invited to draw an invidious distinction with
 the case of persons, toward whom our interests are not uniform, but carefully individuated? But why shouldn't one take this as an empirical claim
 (perhaps masking a moral aspiration) about which skepticism has nothing
 to say? And couldn't it be claimed, with equal empirical plausibility and
 equal moral perception, that one's interest in different objects is far less
 uniform than one's interest in other human beings; that our interests in
 a column, a mirror, a tree, an apple, a seed, are more divergent than our

=== p. 451 ===

                BETWEEN ACKNOWLEDGMENT AND AVOIDANCE                      45!

interests in the things of the world that can accept or reject us, and that
can be helped or hurt by us?"

   Over and over, an apparent symmetry or asymmetry between skepticism
with respect to the external world and skepticism with respect to other
minds has collapsed, on further reflection, into its opposite. (For example:
There is no best case for knowing another because there is no example
that carries the right representativeness. — Ah, but there is! There is the
Exemplar himself, or herself! Or again: In both arenas, the idea of the
Outsider arises. —Ah, but there is a critical difference in the way we envision the powers of the Outsider in each arena.) I do not, accordingly, so
much wish to claim that I have found certain ultimate asymmetries between these skepticisms as that the oscillation between sensing an asymmetry under each symmetry, and a symmetry under each asymmetry, is itself asymmetry enough to warrant, if not to assess, an intuition that in the
sense in which we can arrive at skepticism with respect to the external
world we cannot arrive at skepticism with respect to other minds; or
rather, that with respect to the external world, an initial sanity requires
recognizing that I cannot live my skepticism, whereas with respect to others a final sanity requires recognizing that I can. I do.
   As I do not require that there be a level at which a feature of the one
direction of skepticism cannot be found or applied in the other, but only
that at each level a feature found to be natural in the one direction will
be found to have to undergo inflection or reservation to find itself in the
other direction; so I do not mean at last to say that only material object
skepticism is the real skepticism, as if we knew exhaustively what constitutes reality here. (We might think of the skepticisms as differing the
way men and women differ: nothing is different and everything is different.) It would not hurt my intuitions, to anticipate further than this book
actually goes, were someone to be able to show that my discoveries in the
regions of the skeptical problem of the other are, rightly understood, further characterizations of (material object) skepticism, of skepticism as
such. So that, for example, what I will find in Othello's relation to Des-demona is not just initiated by the human being's relation to the world,
in particular by that phase of its career in which the human being makes
to secure or close its knowledge of the world's existence once and for all,
only to discover it to be closed off forever; but also that their relation remains to the end a certain allegory of that career. The consequent implication that there is between human existence and the existence of the

=== p. 452 ===

world a standing possibility of death-dealing passion, of a yearning at
once unappeasable and unsatisfiable, as for an impossible exclusiveness or
completeness, is an implication that harks back, to my mind, to my late
suggestion of the possibility of falling in love with the world, blind to its
progress beyond our knowledge. Our reflection about the nature of the
differing skepticisms lets us think in the following way of the relation between our adventure with the world and our strangling of it: One respect
in which I found a skepticism of mind to differ from the skepticism of
matter, one feature present in the case of mind and not of matter, is a development in the thing of "avoiding the best". I said that in the realm of
the external world you could not avoid the best case but only avoid knowing that it is the best, whereas in the realm of the other both paths are
open. But there is a certain exception to this, a level at which this asymmetry too finds its symmetry. There is a human being, a way of being
human, not insanely, in which an innocence and purity toward the world,
 if not exactly a mature love, allows an evenness in it or readiness for it
 that would not understand the exclusive or compressed stake in a best
 case; a being for whom any object might be as good as any other, in a
 world in which any might be loaded. This is the way of the clown, especially in his photogenesis, in what becomes of him on film, particularly
 in the figures of Charlie Chaplin and Buster Keaton. No case of externality is best for them because every case is best; this world is best, since no
 other is imaginable. This one is imaginable. No possibility, of fakery, simulation, or hallucination, goes beyond the actualities of their existence.
  But to live thus without escape is to be up to being the one who gets
  slapped, to being one for whom dignity does not depend upon standing,
  to be beyond expectation. However hard such a view is to maintain, it is
  even harder to share. So while it is easy to imagine these figures pining
  away for another, it is not easy to imagine them claiming another erotically. This is a way of stating their resemblance to children. Their refinement is to know everything skepticism can think of. I do not so much
  wish to say that they live skepticism as that they are survivors of it. (I
  have said a little more along these lines, and a little differently, in
  "What Becomes of Things on Film?".) It ought to be a profit of studying
  tragedy and comedy as epistemological matters that we come to develop
  epistemological equations between them.
     — But I am still bound to say that I remain suspicious of the formula
   "to live one's skepticism". This once again seems to be just a flat contradiction on the account you have presented. — Wouldn't you allow it as
   a paradox? I need a formula which at once shows the intimacy of the prob-

=== p. 453 ===

lem of others with the question of skepticism and shows the break between them. — But once more, and apart from whatever you mean by
attaching importance to particular "formulas", have you produced skepticism upon the failure of your best cases? — I might say that that is my
question. I am trying to discover the problem of others. — But you
haven't so much as produced a candidate for this role until you show
what could bring us back to earth, could take us out of the study, to others; what it is that constitutes an alternative to our speculations, upon
which our speculations have, from their unique perspective, cast their
special, unsettling light.
    But I have explained why there is no alternative of that kind, in the
arena of the other. The reason is that there is no human alternative to
 the possibility of tragedy. — You do not claim, I believe, to go around
every day in roughly Othello's frame of mind? — Not exactly. But I
claim to see how his life figures mine, how mine has the makings of his,
 that we bear an internal relation to one another; how my happiness depends upon living touched but not struck by his problems, or struck but
 not stricken; problems of trust and betrayal, of false isolation and false
 company, of the desire and the fear of both privacy and of union. — If
 so, isn't this something just about you and about him? — If so, then
 either Othello is no tragedy or I have not seen what it is. I do not claim
 to have explained how one human being's life (fictional or actual) can be
 representative of human life generally, which would perhaps come to explaining the idea that a human being is something that bears an internal
 relation to all other human beings, that they are mutually attuned, that
 they are species-beings. I do claim, for example, that Othello is thus representative, and that to understand that (literary) fact would be the same
 as to understand what the (philosophical) problem of others is, in particular why its best cases take the forms they take.
    — And yet if now your child were to come into the study, these thoughts
 and this mood would vanish, would they not? You would be recalled, interrupted, as surely as if the mood you were in had been that in which
 you find that what you call the external world is dependent on your contingent human sensuous nature. — Now I am bound to say that this just
 seems to me to register your prejudice that the skepticisms must have the
 same (unstable) conclusion, that there must be a normal alternative to
 skeptical speculations concerning other minds. For otherwise why invoke
  the sentimental picture of the child? To be sure, I will, I hope, stop what
 I am doing and attend to the child. But must I take it that the same distraction supervenes as in the material object case, the same disruption of

=== p. 454 ===

attention, the same inaccessibility of the same awful truth? On the contrary, inclining to the belief that I have no certain relief from my isolation, I might take the child not as an alternative to the knowledge of my
inaccessibility to or by others, but as some solace for it — a solace not because the child frees me from my speculations about others, but because
he is not, as I conceive him now, relevantly other; he merely extends the
content of my narcissism. And if a genuine other does enter, what then'
From the meditation on material objects, I would face a figure that must,
like initial zeros, drop out of my skeptical calculations, because there is
zero relevant difference between me and others in contemplating material
objects. But if I am meditating others, then I face an instance of the very
topic of my meditation, one whose relevant difference from me is all the
difference in the world.
   The figure of the child here suggests this further general asymmetry between our knowledge of the material and of the mental. Although skepticism in both arenas discovers our liabilities as knowers, expresses our
disappointment with finitude, the ideal of knowledge implied by material
object skepticism — of unlimited penetration or fastidiousness or completeness in our claims — vanishes upon the return to the everyday, as if
it were always insubstantial, or damned. Whereas the ideal of knowledge
implied by skepticism with respect to other minds — of unlimited genuineness and effectiveness in the acknowledgment of oneself and others —
haunts our ordinary days, as if it were the substance of our hopes.
   — But doesn't the allusion just now to Faust (with his ideal of knowledge damned) suggest the possibility of a tragedy in our knowledge of the
external, material world, a sort of purely intellectual tragedy? Haven't
you yourself pointed to this in speaking of a stratum of symmetry in
which what corresponds to acknowledgment in relation to others is acceptance in relation to objects? ("The Avoidance of Love", p. 324). — If
 there is a purely intellectual tragedy, its protagonist will still have to be
characterized as "living his or her skepticism", living some inability to acknowledge, I mean accept, the human conditions of knowing. And who
 could be the audience for such a subject, since human beings are not different from one another in this regard? How could the antagonist, for
 some flaw, become isolated from the human community, in a way that
 represents the contingent individuality of each witness? Here we would
 have to take it that possessing a human sensuous nature is itself the tragedy. Yet those who have had the clearest perception of human sensuous
 nature as a whole have not seen tragedy in it, but cautionary myth. The
 Buddha, Plato, St. Paul, take our sensuous imprisonment as one station

=== p. 455 ===

on the path of existence, from which each human being is to arise. (We
have to think what happens to such an idea as that of our arising from
(this feature of) our humanity in such minds as Blake's and Niet/sche's. It
becomes too easy for us to say: Not finitude, but the denial of finitude, is
the mark of tragedy. This denial of finitude has also been taken as the
mark of sin. It was to free humanity of that libel of sinfulness that Blake
and Nietzsche undertook, as it were, to deny the distinction between the
finite and the infinite in thinking of the human.)
   If there were a drama of pure knowledge, it seems that Faust must be
its protagonist. But is Faust a tragic figure? Is he to be understood in
terms of the life of skepticism? Skepticism, after all, has to do with the
absolute failure of knowledge, whereas what Faust lived was the absolute
success of knowledge. But apparently what he is to have discovered about
this success is that it is not humanly satisfying. He is the Midas of knowledge. His is our central modern name for the attempt to overwhelm the
necessity of acknowledgment by the power and the extent of knowledge.
(Cf. "The Avoidance of Love", p. 347.) If we think of Faust as being
granted the wish to escape the human conditions of knowing, I mean the
condition of human knowing, then the clearest theoretical portrait of him
is given by the Critique of Pure Reason, in its descriptions of those who
think to escape the necessity of reason's critique of reason and who, for
example, are shown to live upside down, on their heads as it were, making
the world of their experience "empirically ideal and transcendentally
real". And perhaps more direct descriptions of him are to be found in
Kant's Religion Within the Limits of Reason Alone. Here, as is typical of
Kant's procedures, he goes beyond an expected Enlightenment battle that
takes up the cause of reason against irrationality on the most famous field
of the irrational. The collection of sections called General Observations,
one of which concludes each of the four parts of Kant's volume on religion, together constitute what I think amounts to a general theory of irrationality, a systematic account of what turn out, on this theory, to be a
whole class of phenomena, each of them involving a particular distortion
of human reason. Kant calls the four members of this class fanaticism, superstition, delusion, and sorcery. Not the least of the illuminations of his
theory is its implied proposal that, as one may frame it, the cure for Faust-ianism and for skepticism are the same. — In his deepening of the Enlightenment, Kant not only heralds romanticism; he insures that whoever
refuses his cure for romanticism is fated to succumb to the disease, or
rather that refusing his cure is the best symptom of suffering from its disease. Nay, the best criterion.

=== p. 456 ===

    Dr. Faust's descendant Dr. Frankenstein is generally more childish, or
more patently adolescent, in comparison with his ancestor. This is due,
it would seem, to his more superficial narcissism, and his more obvious
sense of guilt, as well as to his assumptions that what you know is fully
expressed by its realization in what you can make (as though science and
technology were simply the same) and that one cannot finally assume responsibility for one's work, or rather that one can discharge one's responsibility for it (only) by sacrificing oneself to it — not, however, before
sacrificing one's loved ones. It would be nice to understand, in connection
with the declension from the damnation of Faust to the damnable Frank-enstein, why there is a parallel declension in the genres they have inspired — why one of them is the subject of one of the great poetic epics
of the modern world and the other of them is a classic, even a staple, of
 the literature (I include cinema) of the fantastic, especially of fictionalized
 science. Less prejudicially, the relation of the genres should be thought of
 not in terms of decline but in terms of popularization.
     On understanding such a relation of genres the understanding of the
 possibility of living one's skepticism with respect to others may turn out
 to turn. I have more than once said or implied that the problem of the
 other was no less a literary than a philosophical problem. One task of this
 problem is to determine the spirit in which such a story as, for example,
  that of the craftsman in the garden is told, or that of an Evil Genius who
 continuously deceives me. In what spirit must these possibilities be told
 in order that they challenge my everyday beliefs, my natural orientation?
 And now I think we would have to enter more deeply into some territory
 we once labelled with the rubric "projective imagination" (Chapter VIII,
  the section entitled "The Philosopher's Projection . . ."). It is the territory that contains the most fundamental, or earliest, tasks of accounting
  for the occupation of ordinary language procedures in philosophy — the
  task, for example, of accounting for the difference between taking Aus-tin's question "What should we say if . . < ?" as, what it is, an invitation
  to a conceptual sorting about your present, a demand for present consciousness, as opposed to, what it is not, an invitation to make a prediction about your future (cf. Must We Mean What We Sayf, p. 66); or between Wittgenstein's remarks about what he calls the natural history of
  human beings and what he would call a hypothesis about that history
   (cf. Investigations, p. 230). In particular, here, we would need to articulate the difference between what we might call a thought experiment and
  what we might call a piece of science fiction. In the latter case we may
  work out the consequences of a hypothesis about a fictional world, one

=== p. 457 ===

which we do not identify as ours; in the former case the counter-factual
nature of the fiction takes place within a world we do identify as ours. To
take the fiction of an Evil Genius as an occasion for working out imaginatively the consequences of life in a world in which there was such a figure
(I mean in which a particular character is cast in that role, call him Dr.
No) would not yield the speculation, as I understand it, that Descartes
asks us to participate in. For a fictional tale is a history over which the
teller has absolute authority, call it the power to stipulate the world from
beginning to end; given that, there can be no room for Descartes's revelatory denial that such an Evil Genius could exist, that this would be like
supposing God to be less than God. It seems to me that I meant my story
of the craftsman in his garden to be one of several in which what comes
forth is our sense that our conception of the outer (of the body and its degrees of freedom) is bound to our conception of the inner (of the soul
that breathes expression), and our conception of ourselves to our conception of our others. I did not intend it as the beginning of an imaginative
speculation about, for example, how we natural humans could learn to
live with synthesized humans, or what such creatures could count as love,
or justice, or courtesy, or fun.
    Recognizing that an example or two is not an account of this important matter, I would like to assert my sense that science fiction cannot
house tragedy because in it human limitations can from the beginning
be by-passed. This idea helps me explain my difference in intuition
from those philosophers who take it that a scientific speculation, or fiction, is sufficient to suggest skepticism; for example, the speculation that
for all I know I may be a brain in a vat. (I believe for certain people
such an image may be a good (figurative) expression for the way things
really are, with each current brain mostly awash in a skull on a frame; or
perhaps the image yields a good expression only about certain people.)
Now apart from the fact that I do not feel compelled to consider this possibility, I do not feel that I am sufficiently clear about what would constitute considering it (as a hypothesis). For suppose it is true. Then I am to
consider that a brain in a vat is to consider itself to be a brain in a vat,
which seems to amount to imagining discovering it to be my (or its) situation. If I consider that I may now be asleep and dreaming, then I have a
strong if vague idea that there is something and someone beyond, outside
my dream; a strong if vague idea of what it would be like to wake up; and
if I find myself walking with someone over to a sleeping human being and
being told that that is me, then I know that that is either a dream, or I
have walked into a piece of science fiction. But in undertaking to consider

=== p. 458 ===

that I may be a brain in a vat I find that I have a most concrete idea of
what must be happening outside, beyond the vat, monitoring it; and if I
find myself walking with a monitor down white corridors, I can specifically imagine his pointing out, through a long window, as if pointing out
a newborn in a hospital nursery, one among a number of vats with brains
in them, and saying: "That one just there is you." (How would it change
matters if instead of brains we took bodies in the vats?) — It seems to me
evident that I have no idea what it would be like to learn that 7 am a brain
in a vat; which seems to be good reason to suppose that I cannot seriously
consider the possibility, as a hypothesis, that I am one. I may of course go
on with the story of the brain nursery.
    The immediate value of such a story, for me, is its demonstration that
not just any way of being offered a world sensuously indistinguishable
from my world is enough to cause me skeptical doubt. I have, as it were,
simultaneously to be afforded a way of understanding how I came to be
offered it. This is a separate feature of the dreaming and hallucination
possibilities. — How about the other way around? Could we imagine
that there is a culture for which Othello, say, reads like science fiction —
a group who just have no first-hand knowledge of the need for trust or of
the pain of betrayal? — I might say that it seems to me a piece of science
fiction to imagine so. But that is not sure. There is a myth we have given
ourselves that suggests that such a culture of human beings cannot exist — the myth according to which even God, in creating man and woman,
had to leave them with, or rather provide them with, the power of betrayal. Then my idea just now, in reinvoking science fiction, was that if
 there were such a group for which Othello read like science fiction it
 would not be a group of humans. And for this non-human or post-human
 group, a cheap source of science fiction might be what we call daily newspapers (which we might sometimes look at as instances of surrealism).

   I spoke, early in response to the passive skeptical recital, of having arrived at a plateau of uncertainty as to whether I am known, as to what
would count as being known. But it is far from clear that the recital
brought out what it is I want to be assured of in being known, or failing
to be. That meditation passed essentially through the line at which it
seemed that "all anyone knows or could know of me is what I am able to
show them of myself". I did not, I believe, intend to confine the reference
of that line to explicit passages in which I openly demonstrate to the
other my affection or anger or pain or disappointment. But what else,

=== p. 459 ===

what less than such explicitness, can it have intended? It cannot have
meant the same as if I had said "all anyone knows or could know of me
is what shows", for that seems to mean only that of course there must be
some way for another to know (and I took myself to be saying more than
that) and it seems to imply that something of me does not show (and I
took myself to be saying less than that).
   What wants expression here is a sense of limit both in what I can show
and in what I can conceal of myself. It is true of a great deal of what
goes on in me that normally if it is to be known I must tell it, or give expression to it. But for nothing in me is this absolutely true. Whatever in
me I have to conceal I may betray exactly by the way in which I conceal
it. Just that is what is concealed; the concealment of what it is up to me
to express is a perfect expression of it — the slight edge to my denials, the
over-casualness of my manner, the tint of automatonity in my smile or
gait or posture, each of which I might succeed in concealing. . . . There
are those who know how to read such concealments. The concealment of
what there is to express is an exacting art, like camouflage. You might
call it a language; the language of the body. About human beings there
are only open secrets or open questions.
   My painting of the passive recital may, more generally, have by-passed
the real, the special requirement of passivity in being known, the thing I
have sometimes described as letting oneself be known, and as waiting to
be known. It was subject to a particular idea of passivity; as if to make
oneself known, to present oneself for knowledge, were inevitably to distort oneself — as if this were the thing that caused the theatricalization of
oneself. My recital, that is, assumed activity only in making myself known,
not allowing an activity in, so to speak, becoming passive. But activity
just here may well prove to constitute knowing oneself. It is the ability
to make oneself an other to oneself, to learn of oneself something one did
not already know. Hence this is the focus at which the knowledge of oneself and of others meet. I should think a sensible axiom of the knowledge
of persons would be this: that one can see others only to the extent that
one can take oneself as an other. (This is a little weaker than the thought
I earlier described as making confession tolerable, that what one finds in
oneself is a discovery as well of others.) Thoreau puts the thought this
way: "I never knew, and never shall know, a worse man than myself"
(Walden, "Economy"). This is by no means a process of knowing from
one's own case. It is simply not making one's own case exceptional.
   We have more than once come upon the question whether my failure
to know or to be known by another is to be attributed to my, or to my

=== p. 460 ===

other's, incapacity as a knowing subject or as a subject known. In asking
of myself a perfect passiveness, a lucid waiting, I was focussing the problem as it turns upon the capacity of the other to know. This makes the
other not an ideal Confessor (because to a Confessor one must confess,
make oneself known) but an ideal Acceptor. It may be this that Thoreau
called the Friend. For others, the Friend is one to whom, and from whom,
everything to be said can be said, as it is there to be said. Such a one is the
antithesis of the Confessor since nothing would be said in or as confession,
but in description. Such a Friend is impossible for one to envision to the
extent that acknowledgment strikes one as a certain kind of confession.
And if the need to acknowledge presents itself as an urge to confess, it
may therefore present itself as an urge not to, an urge to secrecy. Then one
will have to have something to keep secret. Hence the crime, if only of
imagination, will be for the sake of the guilt. For in a disordered world
guilt will be proof of one's privacy, hence of one's possession of a self, hence
of the nature of one's self. It will be the making known of oneself to oneself. So the desire for sanity can drive one mad.
    If I cannot be certain either that I am not known or that I am, then it
follows that I cannot be certain that a given other is a candidate either
 for knowledge or for ignorance of me. Then it is possible that no other
 is a candidate to do the knowing that I am a human being. But a human
 being could not fail to know, confronting me, that I am a human being.
 Therefore, if the problem of the existence of other minds turns on the
 capacity of the other to know of my existence, then either I do not know
 that I am a human being or I cannot know of the existence of other human beings. — Then who are those others? Let us say that I am, notwithstanding my recent discovery, an other for the others. Then I am at
 best another automaton, or humanoid, or a natural enemy, or a fellow
 member within his or her (non-human — but what sense would that now
 have?) species. I may hunt with them, migrate or hibernate with them,
 breed and fight with them, and we may pick off one another's fleas; we
 may even arrange for one of us to chatter while the rest of us sit quietly in
 rows. Such is the extent of our mutuality. In such a group I may feel hidden. — It should not be surprising that a proof designed to cast doubt
  on the existence of other human beings winds up casting doubt on my
 own existence as a human being. It should also not be surprising that I,
  for one, refuse to accept this proof. I, after all, constructed the proof, and
  therefore surely exist!
     I once accounted for the sense of unknownness by saying that an individual may "take certain among his experiences to represent his own

=== p. 461 ===

mind — certain particular sins or shames or surprises of joy — and then
take his mind (his self) to be unknown so far as those experiences are unknown" ("Knowing and Acknowledging", p. 265). Does an individual in
such straits take it that his existence is unknown? Perhaps he takes it that
he exists for the others as unknown; anonymously, as it were. Perhaps he
or she has the sense, somehow, that he or she is different, exceptional.
(They may, for this reason, suppose that poetry is meant only for them,
since only poetry can find what suffices for their knowledge. But everyone
stands in need of the power of poetry, so long as anyone does. Society
merely limits who may have it. This is one measure of the disorder of the
world.) This sense of difference, of exemption, is a different difference
from the way the slave is different: one does not here see oneself as a kind
of human. And a different difference from the way the outcast is different:
one does not here restrict one's humanity. One singles oneself out for un-knowableness. One interprets one's separateness as isolation and then finds
a cause for it: one is extraordinary, either too good or too bad for ordinary knowledge, too beautiful or too ugly, a monster of sanctity or of evil,
an abyss of happiness or suffering. It seems to me that in such spiritual
straits I might also produce the expression Wittgenstein witnessed about
others not being able to have this pain (striking myself on the breast).
   Wittgenstein's response (at §253) is straight-faced and stuffy:

The answer to this is that one does not define a criterion of identity by emphatic
stressing of the word "this". Rather, what the emphasis does is to suggest the case
in which we are conversant with such a criterion, but have to be reminded of it.

Why is this the answer, or any answer, since obviously it perversely refuses to see what was meant, I mean to see what the breast-striker had in
mind. I was not imagining myself to be offering a criterion of identity
when I imagined striking myself on the breast. — Of course you weren't!
That's the humor in Wittgenstein's answer. Its point is that that's all, at
best, that you could have comprehensibly been doing. You had the impression that you were demonstrating something profound, some metaphysical uniqueness, but you were demonstrating nothing whatever, except perhaps some species of emptiness. That is the rebuke in Wittgenstein's
answer. — But what is the rebuke, what is the diagnosis of my error? To
attempt to make an exception of myself in this way is precisely contrary
to what I have called "the moral of the Investigations as a whole" (supra,
p. 361). But does the Investigations provide an understanding of this
possibility?
   Grant that in striking my breast I did not at all mean that you could

=== p. 462 ===

not have this (descriptively the same) pain, but rather that you cannot,
how shall I say, have it, have this very having of it, that one I just now
inflicted on myself. That! This! Now! Here! Then I shall grant that trying to give my gesture full explicitness leaves it seeming pretty empty;
like informing you, while sitting across from you, that this hand and this
breast that it struck are both mine, my very own. I did not, it seems to
me, mean my remark as a piece of information, but rather as another
kind of reminder, as a kind of parable. — A parable of our separateness,
no doubt. And doubtless a reminder that you are you. — Why is one so
impatient with this? Has such a one never felt his or her existence
slighted, presented to blindness; never felt like insisting upon it, declaring
it? Descartes's insistence on it, I mean his proof of it, just depends on declaring it; anyway asserting it, anyway silently. It would truly have been
ludicrous of him to have tried giving it out as a piece of information!
    My thought here is this: When Wittgenstein presents himself to us as
 denying or slighting our existence, our inner life, we may be prompted to
respond to this apparent denial with a parabolic gesture of insistence
 upon our existence. The parable is to teach not just the fact of my existence, but the fact that to possess it I must declare it, as if taking it upon
myself. Before this, there are no others for me. (So do not believe the
 monster when he tells you that he is monstrous because others treat him
 as monstrous. He is monstrous because he lets the task of becoming human wait upon how others treat him. Circumstances may have forced this
 upon him; he may have a chance to rebel; part of what he will rebel
 against will be his own monstrousness. For a child, a correct waiting here
 is necessary, it is legitimate. It is part of the monster's monstrousness that
 he was never a child; he therefore has not lost what human grownups
 have lost.)
    I may realize the parable differently. In refusing Wittgenstein's therapy
 here, refusing to apply to myself the humor of his answer about the emptiness of emphasizing the word "this", refusing to wear this shoe of rebuke,
 I may be wishing to convey that you just do not know who or what I am.
 Far, accordingly, from wishing, or sensing a need, to define criteria with
 which we would be mutually attuned, I wish, or sense a need, to convey
 how perfectly, originally, I satisfy the criteria. We could say of my condition, or you could say it, that I had made myself morally incomprehensible, as Kierkegaard in effect says of Abraham. (There is the modern man
 for you: knife in hand, full of readiness to sacrifice, but in the absence of
 God, and of Isaac, and hence of an angel in the wings.) (The slave and
 the outcast have been made morally invisible.)

