=== chunk: cavell-1979-claim-of-reason/ch13a-framing-and-seeing-humans ===
title: Framing acknowledgment/avoidance through "perfecting an automaton"
source_pdf: docs/sources/cavell-1979-claim-of-reason/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 356-434
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 329
plan_page_end: 407
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 329 ===

                        XIII
         Between Acknowledgment and Avoidance

In tracing our disappointment with criteria, in denying that Wittgen-steinian criteria can, or are meant to, refute skepticism, I seem, in my remarks about the problem of other minds, to have left the other's privacy
intact. And doesn't Wittgenstein deny privacy? What else is the teaching
of his obsessive emphasis on the publicness of language and on the out-wardness of criteria? I have suggested that the teaching is in service of a
vision that false views of the inner and of the outer produce and sustain
one another, and I would be glad to have suggested that the correct relation between inner and outer, between the soul and its society, is the
theme of the Investigations as a whole. This theme, I might say, provides
its moral.
   In my earlier discussion I was led at one point to ask parenthetically,
"In what spirit does Wittgenstein 'deny' the 'possibility' of a private language?" (p. 84). I will try to take that question outside its parentheses in
the course of gathering together some concluding remarks on the topic of
privacy.
   What gives the impression that Wittgenstein wishes to deny that the
soul is private? What, that is, do we wish to deny, in the face of Wittgen-stein's teaching, when we feel we must protect the privacy of the soul
against him? Is it that we feel the affirmation of privacy to be an affirmation of the existence of the soul itself? —What idea do we have of
privacy?
   When Wittgenstein remarks "It cannot be said of me at all (except
perhaps as a joke) that I know I am in pain", he does not — how could

=== p. 330 ===

33O               SKEPTICISM AND THE PROBLEM OF OTHERS

he? —deny that I alone can express my pain. He will, however, raise
questions about which pains are mine (cf. §411). So let us say: Wittgen-stein does not —how could he? —deny that I alone can express pain
when I alone am in pain. Still, we might raise questions here about what
"can express" has in view. Surely you can express pain no matter what is
happening in me. — I do not think that a certain difficulty or insufficiency in the assertion of our conviction here is irrelevant to what that
conviction is. (Cf. "Knowing and Acknowledging", pp. 263-64.) But let
that pass for the moment. Wittgenstein does not deny that when I am in
pain it is I who give it expression, or fail to — at all events, give it expression by expressing pain, I mean by expressing that pain. Surely it will not
be denied that if I do not give it expression then others will not know of
it. And it is hard not to think of this situation as one in which I alone
know that I am in pain. Wittgenstein's denial that I can properly be said
to know seems to be something that compromises the soul's privacy — as
if privacy were a question of secrecy. If this is one's idea of privacy, then
Wittgenstein's teaching on the subject of privacy will be understood as
saying that we have no unutterable secrets; this will then simply mean
that we have no unbridgeable privacy. Whereas I take his teaching on
this point to be rather that what is accurate in the philosophical or metaphysical idea of privacy is not captured, or is made unrecognizable, by the
idea of secrecy.
    No one will insist that privacy and secrecy have nothing to do with one
another; that is, no one will deny that a sense of secrecy captures, or enforces, a particular sense of privacy. But that sense of privacy ought, on
 its face, to seem of limited metaphysical interest, while possibly of pervasive political significance. A private conversation is one that I do not
 want others to hear, not one they necessarily cannot hear. My private entrance is one through which I can invite others; in principle, anyone in
 the world can be as well acquainted with it as I am. A private joke is a
 more significant case. It may be something I do not bother to explain, or
 something I wish to test or to hook you with; or it may be something I
 do not think anyone else will, or will be able, to appreciate. ("Anyone
 else" may mean anyone other than me, or anyone other than the two of
 us, or anyone other than you, and you are gone.) It is hard to imagine
 Wittgenstein's denying this possibility, that one's specialness may in fact
 go unappreciated by another. No doubt he would deny that it must go
 unappreciated, but is this what anyone wishes to insist upon? It would be
  a strange picture of a skeptic to cloak him as saying that each and every
 mind is so singular as to be inaccessible to every other. Couldn't he, at

=== p. 331 ===

                BETWEEN ACKNOWLEDGMENT AND AVOIDANCE                         S}!}1

most, think this only about his own mind? We might think of this as solipsism, i.e., think of solipsism as narcissism, if that fate became live for
us. Narcissus can question himself, but he cannot give himself an answer
he can care about.
   Secrecy shares with privacy the idea of exclusiveness, or excludedness. Is
the idea of privacy which some would care to defend and others to attack
an idea of one soul excluded from, or by, another? If so, what role does
the question of one soul's knowledge of another play here? I can know,
for example, all there is to know about Garbo, even know her personally,
perhaps as her constant companion from whom she has no secrets, and
still be excluded from her, not share her (inner) life. (Though I may tell.)
   Let us see two sides to the question of whether another's soul — for example a sensation of the other — is private. Professor George Pitcher has
seemed convinced by Wittgenstein that the answer is affirmative, that sensations are private:
. . . pain language-games do not contain references to our private sensations,
since these, like the contents of the pictured pot, cannot be talked about. The
point is not that private sensations are nothing, or do not exist, or are not important, or anything of the sort; the point is rather that nothing can be said
about them, and hence they play no part in our language-games. They are "as
nothing" in those language-games. [The Philosophy of Wittgenstein, p. 300]
Pitcher characterizes such a view, or the view it expresses, as "commonsensical" (p. 283). Professor John Cook seems convinced by Wittgenstein
that the answer is negative, that sensations are not private. In the final
section of his paper "Wittgenstein on Privacy" he explores Pitcher's view
of the matter; he concludes that Pitcher "has failed to see how very queer
is the idea that sensations are essentially private" (p. 323). I had recoiled
when Pitcher spoke of a commonsensical idea that sensations are private,
partly because I disagreed with his reading of Wittgenstein, but mostly
because I felt that he had not presented anything I could recognize as the
commonsensical attitude toward privacy and I felt that it may be essential to a correct philosophical view of the matter to elicit the complexities, or crudities, of our commonsensical attitude toward it. But when
Cook asks that one simply see how very queer the idea is that sensations
are private, my response is, impatiently, just to opt back for privacy; it
seems the most commonsensical view of sensations one could have.
   Professor Alan Donagan, in his paper "Wittgenstein on Sensation",
agrees with Pitcher that according to Wittgenstein sensations are private,
in the sense that the actual quality of the other's sensation is unknowable
to us and that that is irrelevant to our knowledge that the other is, say,

=== p. 332 ===

in pain. He disagrees with Pitcher over whether the sensation, so conceived, can be named. Pitcher's view was that sensations cannot be
named, but that nevertheless our words for sensations have (other) "legitimate uses" (p. 300). Donagan's view is that sensations can be named, or
rather, referred to in a particular way. The disagreement here arises, or is
supported, by differing interpretations of Wittgenstein's parable of the
boiling pot.
   It is instructive to study that parable further.
Of course, if water boils in a pot, steam comes out of the pot and also pictured
steam comes out of the pictured pot. But what if one insisted on saying that
there must also be something boiling in the pictured pot? [§297]
Pitcher remarks: "It would be absurd to start talking about the liquid in
the pictured pot; to wonder, for example, whether it is water or tea or
soup. . . . There is no answer to such questions; the liquid in the pot is
no part of the picture — and language-games which involve the picture do
not contain references to the contents of the pot. Similarly, pain language-games do not contain references to our private sensations . . ."
(pp. 299-300). Donagan's reply runs as follows: "If Wittgenstein meant
what Pitcher says he did, his parable was ill-chosen. It is true that the
pictured pot does not contain, as a part, pictured boiling water. But it is
not true that you can describe what the whole picture is a picture of,
without referring to the contents of the pot. Nor is it always absurd to inquire what liquid is in the pot. A picture of a metal teapot on a hot plate,
with steam pouring from its spout, might well illustrate how not to keep
hot tea. . . . Wittgenstein did not overlook these points: indeed, when
he applied his parable to the picturing of pain, he introduced an elaborate quasi-technical terminology for making them. . . ." What Donagan
 means by "quasi-technical terminology" is, I take it, primarily the distinction between a Vorstellung and a Bild, i.e., between an image and a picture as set out in the third section following the parable:
It is — we should like to say — not merely the picture of the behavior that plays
a part in the language-game with the words "he is in pain", but also the picture
of the pain. Or, not merely the paradigm of the behavior, but also that of the
pain. — It is a misunderstanding to say "The picture of pain enters into the
language-game with the word 'pain' ". The image [Vorstellung] of pain is not a
picture [Bild] and this image is not replaceable in the language-game by anything that we should call a picture. — The image of pain certainly enters into
 the language-game in a sense; only not as a picture. [§300]
 (Pitcher prefers to translate Vorstellung as "representation" rather than,
 with Professor Anscombe, "image". Donagan is dissatisfied with both

=== p. 333 ===

translations and offers instead "imaginative representation". I would myself be content to use the old, more or less emptied word, "idea".) Dona-gan's notion is, then, this: ". . . when you draw a boiling pot, your drawing will contain a Bild of steam and a Bild of a pot, but not a Bild of
anything boiling. A Vorstellung, by contrast, can represent indirectly"
(p. 330). Similarly, ". . . although pains cannot be directly represented in
pictures, they can be indirectly represented — in 'imaginative representations' (Vorstellungeri)" (p. 331).
    But wouldn't all of these problems about the contents of the pot be
solved by making the picture of the pot in such a way that you can see
inside it — either by giving us a perspective over the rim of its top, or by
picturing a glass pot? Wittgenstein's parable does not say that the picture
is not like this. Of course these alternative pictures will not seem grippingly pertinent in applying the parable to the question of knowing the
pain of others, which is presumably the point. But why not? Perhaps because we would not know what the analogy is to looking "over the rim of
its top"; we have no perspective of this kind, or ought not to claim one,
on our fellow creatures. And if I try imagining a glass man or woman
(not merely a man with glass skin and muscles, but, as it were, glass
through and through), I find that I do not quite know where to place the
pain. (Suppose I imagine that the glass man's shoulder hurts, and I want
to show where he hurts, say by painting the place red. Do I paint the
pain on his shoulder, or in his brain, or along the nerves between, or in
all at once? The last possibility gives pain so unsatisfactory a shape! Or is
the shape merely too definite?} This is odd, because we certainly know
how or where to look for pain, how to locate it — when, that is, we have
no thought of actually seeing it. You may, if you wish, without much ado,
speak informatively of seeing the boiling water indirectly; that is because
you may, if you wish, without much ado, speak of seeing it directly.
    If the tipped or transparent pot is not pertinent to the problem of pain,
what is the pertinence of an opaque pot, seen squarely from the side? Do
 we approach the human body more aptly if we take it to be opaque and
seen squarely from the side? What is the point of Wittgenstein's parable
 of the boiling pot?
    First let us actually try answering its concluding question — the question, presumably, the parable was constructed in order to pose: "But what
 if one insisted on saying that there must also be something boiling in the
 pictured pot?" What should be said in response to this insistence? — I
note that Wittgenstein's German mentions nothing explicitly about "insistence". It says simply, "Aber wie, wenn man sagen wollte . . ."; i.e.,

=== p. 334 ===

"but what if one wanted to say". But Anscombe's addition of the idea of
insistence seems to me a correct inflection. The sense we are to have of
the person supposed in the parable is that he still wants to say something
(about something). The sense is: nothing could be clearer than the scene
he has had set out for him ("Freilich . . .", the parable begins; "Of
course . . ."); everything is free and self-confessed, nothing up the sleeve,
there is not even a sleeve; and yet, and notwithstanding all that, this man
doubts — or maybe not so much doubts as pangs — something is on his
mind, he has some reservation, he is not free and clear. He may say nothing at all; he may not have the courage to, or the words. (If he has both,
they will come forth with insistence.) This is the philosopher's cue; he
enters by providing the words. (It is not his only cue, and this cue is not
only for philosophers, and not for all philosophers.) Wittgenstein typically brings on an interlocutor to provide such words; the mode this depicts is typically one of insistence. It is a way in which Wittgenstein depicts his reader (i.e., a version of himself) at a particular crossroads. Here
the first step in freeing words is to give expression to them; the remaining
steps are taken in grammar. Failing to pick up such a cue, or failing to
provide genuinely freeing words upon it, are two forms, newly recovered
forms perhaps, of philosophical failure. One could also think of them at
the same time as cases of literary failure.
   But we were about to try responding to the parable's question. One response might be: "Of course there is something boiling in the pictured
pot! Otherwise there wouldn't be steam coming out! That there is something boiling inside is what the steam means! You seem not to understand what a picture is!" But sometimes one's response will be: "Nonsense! How could something be boiling in a picture? You seem to have
forgotten what a picture is! You might as well look for something boiling
in the words 'pot with steam coming out'!" —Are these answers? If so,
why are there two of them, vying with one another? If not, what is the
 question?
   The parable comes in response to — that is, as instruction for — the interlocutor's particular insistence which precedes it:

"Yes, but there is something there all the same accompanying my cry of pain.
And it is on account of that that I utter it. And this something is what is important — and frightful." — Only whom are we informing of this? And on
what occasion? [§296]

The factor common between this interlocutor and the parable that follows him, is the idea of "something", a something there, a something

=== p. 335 ===

here, inside. This idea of "something" is what the parable is about. Evidently this interlocutor has been led to his insistence on "something" (or
his reservation about it, his call to keep it in reserve) by his taking Witt-genstein (or someone) to have said or suggested that nothing is, or may
be, going on inside him, whatever his (outward) expressions. That is to
say, Wittgenstein has created this interlocutor out of his sense that a
reader, his fictive interlocutor, may well be led to take something he has
written as this interlocutor has taken it, namely as denying that anything
is going on inside him. That is to say, Wittgenstein is expressing through
this interlocutor his own impulse to take his words in this way. The point
is to ask us to consider where the suggestion comes from that perhaps
(others have it in mind that) nothing is going on inside us. Why is such
a suggestion — more or less psychotic on the face of it — so much as worth
an answer, even a parable? Why is it alarming? (Why are psychotics
alarming?)
   Having responded (in two equally clear but clearly opposing ways) to
the parable's question, it is easy enough in the parable to say what the
"nothing" is that the interlocutor's "something" insists upon ruling out,
and creates in the act of denying: The fire in a picture will not burn you
(unless you're in the picture); the steam from this pictured pot will not
open this morning's letter. What it is is a picture. — "Only whom are
we informing of this? And on what occasion?" These questions are out of
place here, because my intention was not one of informing anyone of
anything; I was elaborating a parable. The questions would equally have
been out of place if the interlocutor had meant his words otherwise differently from the insistent assertion of a piece of information or as the
expression of some reservation. The alternative is not necessarily to have
meant them parabolically. He might have meant them ironically, say in a
speech for a gathering of fellow sufferers, raging against and ridiculing
those who cannot hear, even when they cause our cries of pain. Or he
could have sung his words, or ones of similar sentiment. Then he could
have simply, uninsistently meant them; if not plain-spokenly at any rate
whole-heartedly, utterly, unreservedly. One of the greatest of torch songs
is available to him: "They asked me how I knew my true love was true. I
of course replied: 'Something here inside cannot be denied.' "
   What is not easy to say, or to see, is why anyone would "insist on saying" (or hold in reserve, but I will not always add that) what Wittgen-stein asks us to suppose someone might insist on saying — either that
there must be something boiling in a picture, or that there must be something boiling in a (pictured) pot which is for all the world boiling, or both

=== p. 336 ===

somehow together. That these bits of madness or emptiness constitute
such insistence is the feature of the parable missed, it seems to me, in
Pitcher's and Donagan's readings of it. (If so, this may confirm the accuracy of Wittgenstein's parable: philosophers, being human beings, fail
to recognize the bits of madness or emptiness they are subject to under
the pressure of taking thought.) Pitcher and Donagan both take it that
there must be a coherent answer to the parable's question. Pitcher's answer was, in effect, that it is of no significance whether anything is in the
pot, or rather of no significance what is in it; we cannot name (or know?)
whatever is in it (even though Wittgenstein begins the parable with the
words "if water boils in a pot"?), but all the same we can use words for
sensations apart from this knowledge. Donagan's answer, in effect, was
that while in one sense we cannot name or know what is in the pot, in another sense we can (indirectly).
    It is, consequently, not easy to see how the parable of §297 applies to
the insistent utterance of §296. In particular, that utterance does not seem
to us empty or mad (". . . but there is something there all the same accompanying my cry of pain. And it is on account of that that I utter
it . . ."). It seems, on the contrary, in position, simply true. Donagan recognizes that the quotation marks hedging the utterance signal that it is
"not to be taken propria persona". He accounts for this by saying that
 nevertheless "the questions that follow show [Wittgenstein] to have considered it a legitimate philosophical reminder" (pp. 335-36). I do not
 think so. The parable asks us to look again at that utterance, in particular to be suspicious of its insistence. We are, one might say, asked to step
 back from our conviction that this must be an assertion (or a reminder)
 and incline ourselves to suppose that someone has here been prompted to
 insistent emptiness, to mean something incoherently.
     (This is not the same as trying to mean something incoherent. Wittgen-stein alludes to this possibility in saying "When a sentence is called senseless, it is not as it were its sense that is senseless" (Investigations, §500).
 Nor is it the same as meaning something other than you think. This would
 describe cases in which your words make sense, and they are put together
 correctly, but you are as it were meaning them in the wrong place. This
  sort of possibility is brought out in Wittgenstein's employment of what
 he calls, in §48, "the method of §a", namely "[considering] a language-game for which [an] account is really valid", really fits. Other examples
 will express the illusion of meaning something. (Professor Cook, in the
  paper of his mentioned before, is attentive to Wittgenstein's concern
 with various forms of what Cook calls "senselessness". He is instructive

=== p. 337 ===

               BETWEEN ACKNOWLEDGMENT AND AVOIDANCE                      gfj^

and interesting on the topic at, e.g., pp. 308-09.) With the phrase "meaning something incoherently", I am surmising, and wishing to isolate, a
different human possibility, one that arises from the possibility of meaning words in particular ways — e.g., ironically, parabolically, metaphorically; namely the possibility of meaning them all right, but of meaning
them the wrong way, or with an unseen sense. Here it is the magic of
words which returns: as if the saying of a word materialized its meaning.
(This may be going on in Wittgenstein's case about saying that a stove is
in pain (§350).) It becomes important to say that meaning words literally
is not just one way among others of meaning them. If it were, a child
would learn to speak if we always spoke to it ironically, metaphorically,
parabolically. This happens to a greater or lesser extent now. Perhaps to
a certain extent it is unavoidable, since it is internal to language that its
words can be meant in different ways. None of what I have been saying
has to do with the child's explicit playing with words, e.g., with nonsense
rhymes. Nor do I wish to say that the ability to be literal is more important than the ability to be non-literal — any more than I wish to say that
it is better to have had a mind than to have lost it.)
   If the utterance "But there is something there . . ." is an assertion,
then there must be some occasion on which it can be used to assert something to someone, inform someone of something. Focus on the phrase
 "accompanying my cry of pain". The scene is one in which I cry out in
pain. Is my cry in itself incomprehensible? Presumably not for the reason
 that others do not know why or how I am in pain. But if for the reason
that the others do not know what crying out (in pain) means, then adding the words about pain will hardly be expected to help. Imagine that
as you stand up some late night from a game of cards you raise your arms
for a good stretch and produce a muscle cramp in your neck. It is excruciating, your body contorts, as if to duck the full impact of the pain, and
you grunt or whine as if pierced. Can we further imagine your being
prompted to say, or to grunt out or whine further, in that condition,
"There is something here accompanying my whine of pain"? If we try
imagining that you are addressing someone (I suppose the other card
players) who persistently fail to admit your pain, hence persistently deny
it, and that you are trying, in one final anguish, to elicit their acknowledgment, then oughtn't we perhaps to imagine further that you moan further, ". . . and moreover there is anguish accompanying my whining of
 this information"? — Kafka's Hunger Artist, faced with universal incredulousness in response to his feat of self-starvation, might have tried
giving out false information about it, information which lessened the

=== p. 338 ===

magnitude of his suffering, as if willing to trade off full acknowledgment
for some part of it, as if part would go some way toward establishing the
reality of his suffering in his own eyes, or its worth. It would have been a
subtler stratagem than the one I have proposed, but it must also fail; his
audience came to lack not so much belief as interest. If I say (something I
said in "The Avoidance of Love", p. 347) that the slack of acknowledgment can never be taken up by knowledge, I do not mean to say that the
imagination can never be fired by information, rather that you cannot always know when the fire will strike.
  We can describe the situation this way: The words "something accompanying my cry of pain" are forced upon us when we feel we must enforce the connection between something inner and an outer something.
But those very words — or rather the insistence with which in such an
eventuality they are employed, or the reservation with which they are
withheld — exactly serve to break this natural connection. (In philosophy,
as I had occasion to say earlier, we want criteria to do less than they do.)
They make the fact that an expression and what it expresses go together
seem more or less accidental, or perhaps like a primitive natural law, as
for example that when water boils in a pot steam comes forth from the
pot; and, by the way, a much weaker law, because quite often when pain
boils in a human being pain-behavior does not come forth.
   The philosophical task posed by Wittgenstein's parable (not, again, notably unlike a literary task) is to describe what is wrong with the assertion that "something is in the pictured pot" — i.e., to describe the emptiness of the assertion, the momentary madness in the assertion, that is, its
failure to amount to an assertion within an insistent sense that it is one —
without at the same time seeming to deny that something is in the
pictured pot.

   "It is — we should like to say — not merely the picture of the behavior
that plays a part in the language-game with the words 'he is in pain', but
also a picture of the pain" (§300). Why should we like to say this? (And
here Wittgenstein clearly includes himself among the "we".) We will
want to know something about the impulse here to speak of the picture
or the paradigm of the behavior — unless this much is obvious, since we
just are confronting a real picture, which would be possible when using
the words "he is in pain". But we can cancel out the modifications "picture or paradigm of" on both sides; then we are left with: It is not merely
the behavior that pertains to the language-game with the words "he is in

=== p. 339 ===

               BETWEEN ACKNOWLEDGMENT AND AVOIDANCE                      JJQ

pain" but also the pain. Now an impulse which these words may express
seems clear enough. We want to say that when we express our recognition
of the other's pain we are recognizing not merely an expression but also
that of which it is the expression; our words reach as immediately to the
pain itself as to the behavior — that, the pain itself, is what our words
mean. What this says must be true, and yet one again feels on the brink
of an old misunderstanding, taking the "pain itself" and "mere behavior"
as two different things (though no doubt generally in the closest possible
connection with one another). The brink of misunderstanding is here because the brink of emptiness is here: we do not know to whom such words
are being said; who could be informed by them. We do not know why
we want to say them, what lack they fill.
   It is to grant the truth of our words here, or rather the validity of the
impulse which gives rise to them, while at the same time to head off the
misunderstanding those words beckon, that Wittgenstein goes on to say:
"The image of pain certainly enters in a sense, only not as a picture."
What is ruled out by saying "not as a picture"? Something that is ruled
out is the idea that there may be something beyond or behind the behavior, a something left over, of which there could be a picture (or an indirect representation), or of which there could not be a picture (but only,
as it were, as a matter of physical or metaphysical accident). As though a
picture of suffering, say Griinewald's Crucifixion, is a perfect picture of a
man and of a cross but (necessarily) an imperfect or indirect picture of
suffering. (It is a sort of picture of a picture of suffering.)
   What is ruled out is specified a little by Wittgenstein's preceding sentence: "The image of pain is not a picture and this image is not replaceable in the language-game by anything that we should call a picture." The
emphasis on this image implies that certain images are replaceable by
pictures. If, for example, I am searching for a particular man, I might or
might not have an image of him in my mind. If I am worried about it,
I might carry a picture of him in my pocket or my hand, and that would
do everything for me, in my search, that an image in my mind would. It
would do more, if I plan to ask people whether they have seen him. But
in the present case, in the language-game with the words "he is in pain",
what is at issue is my response to an expression or scene of pain; the image
of pain is part of the expression of my response to a being in pain. It is I
who give expression to that response. Whereas a picture is just something
else to which I have, or lack, a response. Of course a picture / made, or a
line I compose, might be a response to pain, even to that creature's pain.
(Presumably, Grunewald's picture was such a response.) This is evidently

=== p. 340 ===

not a replacement of the image or conception of the other's suffering
which is part of my response to it; it is, one might say, a further or articulated expression of that response. This may be of personal or epistemological or aesthetic interest, but of no metaphysical enlightenment, because now we have two responses to the same pain to contend with. If,
however, my picture (the one I made) is indeed a replacement of an image
which is part of my response to his pain, a substitute for it, filling in or
making up for it, then I am suffering from a temporary or chronic displacement of affect (neurotic or sinful, as you please).
    Does the image of water enter into the language-game with the words
 "If water boils in a pot, steam comes out of the pot and also pictured
steam comes out of the pictured pot"? One or another such image may or
 may not enter. We could say: Seeing (or imagining) the steam is enough.
 (As before, if for some reason you require an image here you can avail
 yourself of a picture.) It is enough not merely in the sense, as I might put
 it, that we know steam is good evidence for water, but that we know what
 steam coming out of a pot means. But there is a question whether, from
 time to time, we know what a piece of pain-behavior means. Not merely
 in the sense that this piece of behavior is, say, a wince, but that this wince
 is of suffering, means suffering. Whether, so to speak, we take in the fact
 that behavior gives (as words do) expression; whether we take in the fact
 that criteria are expressions. (This is the reason I did not want to choose
 among various translations of Vorstellung in the phrase Vorstellung des
 Schmerzes. The emphasis is on the pain, on our conceiving of suffering.
  No one word here will grasp the idea; or perhaps I should say, we have
  as yet no basis upon which to choose among the words. The word would
  have to declare our access to one another, that we have this access at all.)
     A question whether we know what pain-behavior means? What question? Whether we are ignorant of this fact? Or have forgotten it? It is
  only the knowledge that a body which exhibits pain(-behavior) is that of
  a live creature, a living being. Not to know this would be the same as not
  knowing what a body is. And yet this seems to be knowledge that Witt-genstein takes philosophy to deny (under the guise of affirming it); not so
  much to lose hold of as to force from philosophy's own grasp., Over and
  over he comes back to it: "Only of what behaves like a human being can
  one say that it has pains. For one has to say it of a body, or, if you like, of
 a soul which some body has" (§283). And in Part II of the Investigations,
  where again the question of suffering has arisen: "My attitude towards him
  is an attitude towards a soul" (p. 178). And, to be sure, it is the attitude of
  a soul. Philosophy has its characteristic ways of avoiding this knowledge,

=== p. 341 ===

and its motives for it. So have religion and politics their characteristic
ways. But how can the connection between body and soul be denied?
   "For how can I go so far as to try to use language to get between pain
and its expression?" (§245). This question is, apparently, an attempt on
Wittgenstein's part to express a frame of mind in which one feels that in
order to insure the connection between a sensation and its name one has
to get to the sensation apart from its expression, get past the merely outward expression, which blocks our vision as it were. But Wittgenstein's
question is: How can one so much as try to do this? How can one so much
as be of a mind to? Let us try answering the question as follows: "Nothing
is closer than the inner and the outer, e.g., pain and the expression of
pain. There is no room between." This might be all right, if it is meant
figuratively. But taken figuratively it is ambiguous. One may say that
nothing came between a person's experience and his expression of it as a
way of saying that his expression was genuine, uncontrived, candid. But
if there is no genuine expression forthcoming — either because an expression is absent or uncandid, or because there is nothing of the right kind
to be expressed (the expression is, say, feigned) — then one might say
nothing came between on the ground that in such cases there are not two
 things for anything to come between.
    I draw various morals from this question Wittgenstein poses himself.
 "Between" is first of all a picture. I can go so far as to wish to wedge language in because the picture of something between experience and expression is not necessarily a bad one (any more than the picture of something behind our words and actions is necessarily a bad one). The reason
 I want to wedge in language is that our working knowledge of one another's (inner) lives can reach no further than our (outward) expressions,
 and we have cause to be disappointed in these expressions.
    We might use the expression "something came between" to describe a
case in which just as I was going to tell you about our mutual friend, she
walked in. Or, a case in which just as I had gone so far as to bring up the
 situation for which I owe you an apology or to begin telling you the history of a feeling of love as preparation for declaring it, the feeling vanished. "Something came between" (between me and my feeling) in such
cases means, roughly, something was blocked. But what blocked my expression was not my behavior, for one could also say that the behavior
was blocked. — The picture of something between, with its attendant
 wish to get between, is symptomatic of the kind of creatures we are. Its
significance is that the expression of the soul is never better than natural.
 It is not inevitable, and the odds are against candidness.

=== p. 342 ===

   The picture elaborates itself when we turn over the sense from the first
to the third person. When I felt I had to get to the other's sensation
apart from his giving expression to it (as if that were the way to insure
certainty, or as if the way to insure his candidness was to prevent his
playing any role in his expression) my wish was to penetrate his behavior
with my reference to his sensation, in order to reach the same spot his
reference to himself occupies before, so to speak, the sensation gets expressed. (We might think of the effect of a truth serum as preventing
someone's playing any role in his expression. But we will not think of
this as his speaking candidly.) He can do something we might speak of as
referring to his sensation before it gets expressed. He can suppress a piece
of behavior, or just manage not to act on a feeling, in order to attend to
the quality of the feeling his action would express, or to the meaning of
the feeling, its provenance. He may do this and find that the sensation is
not as bad or as unmanageable as he had feared or averred. Is this what I
have to do in order to refer to my pain?
    I understand Wittgenstein's teaching to be something like this: My
references to my pain are exactly my expressions of pain itself; and my
words refer to my pain just because, or to the extent, that they are (modified) expressions of it. This would be true not only of the expression of a
present experience. To refer to a pain which is past may require a present expression of it, one modified through memory. I may suppress, or
otherwise lose, all memory of it, of how it felt. This can be a curse or a
 blessing. Then I will refer to it, if I do, as though it happened to someone else. One could think of this as speaking of myself historically. People can take this tone toward their present experiences, too. It may be a
 curse or a blessing. The picture of a connection needing to be set up between an experience and the words for it is symbolic of the giving of expression to the experience, giving vent to it. If the expression is broken,
 the reference itself cannot establish the connection. Then what are my
 references to another's pain? They are my (more or less) modified responses to it, or to his having had it, or to his anticipations of it; they are
 responses to another's expressions of (or inability to express) his or her
 pain.
    The hands of a clock refer to the right time when they are appropriately connected to a mechanism which is in good order and is running. If
 it is not in good order or not running, then this connection (of hands to
 mechanism) is of no significance. (I do not think we should say that it is
 of significance, only of the wrong significance. Though it may still be
 worth distinguishing its not being in good order (in which case it is tell-

=== p. 343 ===

ing the wrong time), from its not running (in which case it is telling no
time at all, telling nothing). If one wishes to say that a stopped dock tells
the truth just two instants a day, then one might wish to say that a dead
man gives the right response in just those instances in which the right
response is silence.) If we understood the hands of the clock to refer to the
mechanism, then it would perhaps be of no significance to us whether it
was running in good order or not. Someone might then arrive at the following sorts of feelings: The hands of a clock are completely superficial
characteristics of it; mere conveniences of ours, and so fragile besides! If
a clock is telling the right time, then it would still be telling it whether it
happened to have hands or not, as it would if it were in the dark. (As if
the face and hands of a clock bore the same relation to what is behind
the face as the dial on a radio bears to what is inside the cabinet.) Anyway it would still be thinking the right time; and if it is thinking it all
the time, surely it knows it! —We could know it as well as the clock
could, if we measured its rate and then marked off whatever was telling
us its rate in such a way that we could read the time from that. But then
we would not have penetrated more deeply into the clock; we would have
given it a new kind of hands, artificial limbs as it were. — The notion
that the clock knows the time, whether it tells it or not, is a reasonable
symbolic expression concerning it, in particular concerning its obligation
to keep up with other good clocks, and ultimately concerning the obligation it bears, with all good clocks, towards the sun. Its knowledge is really
its conscience. Would a conscientious clock think of its hands as mere
conveniences, essentially for others? Only if it thought of itself as essentially a thing for others. (It might think of its hands as mere conveniences
essentially for itself, if it were a hermit or a fin-de-siecle clock.) But for us
to think this about such a clock would be presumptuous or sentimental.
We do not bear the same relation it bears to its hands.

  The dependence of reference upon expression in naming our states of
consciousness is, I believe, the specific moral of Wittgenstein's inventions
containing the so-called private language argument. I find little said
within these inventions, especially about privacy and about language,
that is not said, generally more clearly, elsewhere in the Investigations, so
that the very fame of this argument suggests to me that it has been miscast.
  Wittgenstein is described as asserting that there can be no private language. To this assertion, critics have responded, for example, by saying

=== p. 344 ===

(i) that of course there can be a private language since there are such
things as codes; (2) that the notion of a private language is too obscure
to convey what it is Wittgenstein thinks there cannot be; (3) that the conceit is just a fancy way of saying that our sensations are not private and
hence will be convincing at most to those who already agree to that idea
and unconvincing to those who disagree. This third response suggests
that Wittgenstein's case about privacy, whatever it is, had better not rest
on the private language argument. The first response is irrelevant: a code
is ruled out on the face of it as a candidate for Wittgenstein's proposal of
a private language since a code, while of course designed to be incomprehensible to outsiders, is of course designed to be comprehensible to
(other) insiders. The second response is not incompatible with Wittgen-stein's point in developing his argument.
    Wittgenstein does not say that there can be no private language. He
introduces his sequential discussion of the topic, at §243, by asking:
"Could we also imagine a language [in addition to one which certain
 people might speak only in monologues, and which could be understood
 by others] in which a person could write down or give vocal expression to
 his inner experiences — his feelings, moods, and the rest — for his private
 use", where "private" is to mean that "another person cannot understand". The upshot of this question turns out to be that we cannot really
 imagine this, or rather that there is nothing of the sort to imagine, or
 rather that when we as it were try to imagine this we are imagining something other than we think. (The upshot is not about the failure of imagination, and nor is it about the non-existence of a private language, for
 there may yet well be something rightly to be called a private language.)
     So what is the point of "trying" to "imagine" a "language" which "another person" "cannot" "understand"? Evidently, the effort is to illuminate something about the publicness of language, something about the
  depth to which language is agreed in. I would like to say: its point is to
  release the fantasy expressed in the denial that language is something essentially shared. The tone of the sections dealing explicitly with the idea
  of a private language are peculiarly colored by the tone of someone allowing a fantasy to be voiced. It is, of course, a tone familiar elsewhere
  in the book. I cannot prove that this tone is struck more persistently
  here, but I take the occasion to mention my impression of it because it is
  a mistake, I believe, to say that there are just two essential tones of voice
  in the Investigations, the interlocutor's and Wittgenstein's proper voice.
  First, there is no reason to think that there is just one interlocutor
  throughout the book; and second, and obviously, Wittgenstein's own

=== p. 345 ===

speech ranges from the full-throated and the supercilious to the meditative and the bemused. Section 243, which initiates the most continuous
prospect of a private language, and §258, which picks up the idea and
tries to exemplify it, seem to me largely in half-voice.
   He has asked himself whether we can imagine something. He, as it
were, looks up at himself and replies that of course we can use ordinary
language to note our inner experiences for some private purpose (e.g.,
people often develop shorthand devices for their diary entries in order to
keep their thoughts to themselves, and it may not be clear to anyone else
why these particular thoughts, which upon deciphering seem so innocuous, were thought better kept private; the reason itself may be, and remain, private). Then he feels that this is not what he means; it has not
. hit off the fantasy of privacy which he wants to give voice to. Various directions lead from here. At §258 he tries imagining a particular case: "I
want to keep a diary about the recurrence of a certain sensation. To this
end I associate it with the sign 'S', and write this sign in a calendar for
every day on which I have the sensation." Then a long pause. I fill it
about as follows: "There is nothing wrong with this, so far. There could
be lots of reasons for wanting to keep track of this sensation, medical or
psychological or spiritual reasons. Still, this is certainly a very special
kind of entry for a diary. What kind is it?" Then he muses: "I will remark first that a definition of the sign cannot be formulated."
   This is puzzling to remark. A few pages earlier (§239) he had said:
" 'Red' means the color that occurs to me when I hear the word 'red' " — would
be a definition. Not an explanation of what it is to use a word as a name.

Why, similarly, couldn't we say in the present case: "The definition of
'S' is 'The sign I write in my calendar for every day on which a certain
sensation occurs' "? I see two immediate respects in which this differs
from the definition of "red", (i) Unlike "red", the sign "S" has no established, or competing, use in the language, so everything has to be taken
care of by the definition. If someone said, " 'Rad' means the color that
occurs to me when I hear the sound 'rad' ", we would wonder freely why
any color at all should appear upon hearing this sound, certainly why the
same color should always appear, and perhaps wonder whether it appears
also upon hearing the word "radish". Whereas in the case of the definition of "red" we seem to understand someone's idiosyncracy and it need
not concern us further to determine just which color or colors may be involved. (2) The fact that the sign "S" is so much as a recognizable letter
of our language is unnecessary, even misleading. Its function would more

=== p. 346 ===

perspicuously be represented by some characteristic mark, say an asterisk
following the date of the diary entry. I am not ready to say that this sign,
in this use, must (or cannot) have a definition, but at any rate it has an
explanation. And its explanation seems to show it not to be the name of
anything, but to be a kind of abbreviation, or graphic symbol, for some
such remark as "My old sensation recurred again today".
   If in scanning my diary you notice the recurrence of a name, say "Sal
Michael", you might imagine various possibilities, e.g., that I had appointments with this person; that I kept reminding myself to make an
appointment with him (or her); that I from time to time thought of this
person (or is it a fiction, a character from a story I am writing, or my
imaginary friend?) for no discernible reason; that I habitually doodled
this name; that I invented the name for some specific reason best known
to myself. If on closer inspection you see that the name is really "St. Mi-chael", further possibilities will come into view, e.g., that I was thinking
about Joan of Arc, that I wish there were saints, that I was invoking this
saint, or fearing his arrival, that I had decided to write his name in my
diary every day on which he appeared to me. In my time and place I may
have been wondering how one can establish a connection between this
little scrawl of a name and the saint whose name it is — the word here and
the saint there are so far apart. Then I may have wondered how this connection is established when the bearer of the name is no further than the
other side of the city, or perhaps so close as asleep in the same room:
surely the mere distance from me cannot determine how difficult it is for
 the name to reach its bearer. Then my problem was not about saints but
 about naming or noting, whether the bearer is Sal, a saint, or some sensation. The same is true if the reason I thought I could not formulate a
definition was that I thought no genuine name has a formulable definition because no name has a meaning. (I may, by the way, have completely
 forgotten why the name is repeated in my diary, and there may be no external evidence whatever for recovering the information. If I am dead,
 then neither of us will ever know.)
    The entry "S" (or "*") was not to be open to these various possibilities.
 It was simply and solely to be inscribed by me on just those occasions on
 which something happened to me. Is this itself why Wittgenstein remarks
 that there is no definition of it? — as if to say: The sign's sheer being there
 is all that matters; its use is all the meaning it has, and in this case the
 use never varies. Something similar could be said about the ordinary asterisk as well, used as a superscript to indicate a footnote. But while its
 use never varies, there may be other marks also consigned to this identical

=== p. 347 ===

use; and the asterisk must still be distinguished from these. It is the
merest convenience that there should be marks of this kind at all; the
same purposes could be accomplished by special spacings between words,
or elevations of them. (If all of written language were devoted to such
purposes — if all of it were as it were not really part of language but part
of the convenient machinery of writing — then could there be dictionaries? The case would seem to be that all of this dictionary would look
like specialized parts of dictionaries now look. And I think one can say
that a complete dictionary of such a language would have to contain tables that include everything that could be said in the language, as if everything sayable took the form of an idiom.)
   I have said that I could, in a sense, tell someone what the sign "S" in
my diary is for. But granted that Wittgenstein is, in the passage in question, trying to work out the fantasy of a private language, or work into
its mood — the presiding condition of which is that another person cannot
understand the language — I could not, in principle, give that person the
meaning (or the use) of the sign in such a way that he could use it. And
isn't that the purpose of formulating a definition?
   From the idea of formulating a definition, Wittgenstein next goes to
the idea of giving himself a kind of ostensive definition — the obvious alternative route for providing a sign with meaning. This kind of ostensive
definition — presumably, the private kind — leads him to require that he
impress upon himself the connection between the sign and the sensation
upon which he is to focus his attention (if he is to point the sensation out
to himself).

But "I impress it on myself" can only mean: this process brings it about that I
remember the connection right in the future. But in the present case I have no
criterion of correctness. One would like to say: whatever is going to seem right
to me is right. And that only means that here we can't talk about "right". [§258]

But now it looks as if I am prohibited altogether from keeping track of
my inner experiences by noting their occurrence in a diary; all such activities are empty ceremonies (§258), mere shows (§270). It may be that
some philosophers, some people, would find this a convenient prohibition; others will of course find it unacceptable (even though they probably will never actually use their freedom to keep such a diary). Freud
noted that he was able to do his best writing when he was in a state of
mild depression. This looks like an empirical claim. Would it be mere
ceremony, supposing he came to doubt this correlation, for him to note
down what he had noted, e.g., for him to asterisk the days on which he

=== p. 348 ===

found himself in this state and then compare the writing he produced on
such days with his writing at other times? One can imagine a writer for
whom it becomes of interest to note a dozen different states of mind in
which he or she writes; we might imagine the margins of his or her manuscripts lined with asterisks, ampersands, checks, sharps, loops of various
eccentricity, each noting the occurrence of one or more of these states.
Certain writers might feel that it was essential to the significance of what
they were writing that these experiences be incorporated (not necessarily
stated) in the body of their text, as part of the course of their prose. Witt-genstein is such a writer. — What is it we cannot do?
    Notice that Wittgenstein's claim that "here we can't talk about 'right' "
reaches back only three or four sentences, just to the idea of "impressing
the connection on myself", i.e., getting the sign and the sensation stamped
upon one another, so that, so to speak, their faces can be seen to match
quite independently of any decision of mine. (I undertook to do everything by myself necessary for providing something with meaning; then I
expend untold energies trying to convince myself that I have done it.) If
there were no need for the idea of "impressing" the connection, then the
objection about nothing or everything counting as "right" would have
no force. (The objection does not concern the thought that no one could
verify my inner experiences.) What creates the sense of needing, or wanting, the special impressing?
    In each of Wittgenstein's attempts to realize the fantasy of a private
language, a moment arises in which, to get on with the fantasy, the idea,
or fact, of the expressiveness of voicing or writing down my experiences
has to be overcome. In §243 this is quite explicit; in §258 the idea of
formulating a definition of the sign overcomes the fact that the sign already has all the definition it needs — if, that is, I am actually employing
 it as I said I was. A moment ago I said that while this may be an explanation (i.e., an explanation of what I do with the sign, what I use it for) it
may not serve as a genuine definition (i.e., it does not give you the sign's
meaning in such a way that you can now use it as I do). But now this distinction seems pointless. The sign in question just is one for which there
 is no reason to think you have a use (as you have no use for my name
 tapes, or no use for a mezuzah). If, however, you do happen to have such
 a use, happen to be planning to keep a diary yourself, then I've told you
 enough so that you can use my sign if you like, or, of course, any other
 sign you like.
    Whether you have really appreciated the quality of the sensation of
mine which so interests me, or understand why I take such an interest in

=== p. 349 ===

it, is a matter generally of who we are and what our relationship is. I may
have great difficulty in describing it for you, but that itself may contribute
to your appreciation of it. In that case, however, I evidently have no sense
that I must impress upon myself the connection between my sign and my
sensation. What could be clearer? The connection is as clear as the sensation itself. (I may dedicate a lifetime to the effort to convey the meaning
a small budget of words has for me. I may be one of a circle of people so
dedicated, even to the same words. I would hardly have come to this verge,
supposing I am of sound mind, if I thought that no one else could understand my words. But suppose I came to think this. Then either I would
doubt that I myself attached real meaning to them, and I would make
ready to leave the circle; or else the least of my problems would concern
my definition of a word — I mean my formulating it or pointing out its
meaning. My problem has become one, let us say, of bearing the meaning.
Nothing of me but is impressed with the word.)
   I may as a matter of fact from time to time forget, or rather neglect, to
note down my sensation when it occurs. It is perhaps an unpleasant sensation, or somehow humiliating, or it frightens me that I cannot determine its significance. On the days I remember that I had the sensation
and neglected to note it (this may occur to me while I am out for a walk,
or having drinks with an old acquaintance), I make sure to impress the
remembrance of its occurrence upon myself so that I shall remember to
enter its occurrence in the diary when I return home. (Perhaps I tie a
string around my finger to remind myself.) This may itself interest me,
the fact that I as it were sometimes resist my efforts to record the sensation faithfully. Then I might, having returned home to the diary and entered my "S", decide to note my earlier neglect of the sensation by entering an "N" beside the "S". I might make this a practice. But unless some
further complication arises about this practice, there is no occasion for
me to impress upon myself the meaning of this "N", i.e., the connection
between this sign and my neglect. (If I tie a string around my finger and
later forget why I did that, and so fail to enter my "S", and so a fortiori
fail to enter my "N", would that mean that I have forgotten the feeling
with which I tied the string? Which of the feelings would that be? Would
it help to tie another string? Sometimes I sense that to put real confidence
in my memory I have to get to the end of all rememberings. That seems to
say that I have to forgo remembering. And now that strikes me as an
accurate description of what it is to have confidence in one's memory.)
    It is the passing over of expression that makes Wittgenstein's conclusion of this phase of his investigation, at §270, anticlimactic, or not evi-

=== p. 350 ===

dent as a conclusion. He has imagined a particular use for the entry of
the sign "S"; it correlates with a rise in my blood-pressure. He comments: "And now it seems quite indifferent whether I have recognized
the sensation right or not." The correlation is there; it is right and I am
right about it (as the mamometer has shown); it doesn't matter whether I
keep calling the sensation a tingle when it is really a mild sting. "And
what is our reason for calling 'S' the name of a sensation here? Perhaps
the kind of way this sign is employed in this language-game. — And why
a 'particular sensation', that is, the same one every time? Well, aren't we
supposing that we write 'S' every time?" And this is all. This thing of our
"writing 'S' ", and other things we do and experience no deeper metaphysically than this, is all there is for our confidence in our experiences
to go on. And it is enough; it is in principle perfect. But we keep passing
over this supposition of our example, as if the incident of writing kept
getting mentioned only to fill in the image of a diary. But the writing of
the "S" just is the expression of S, the sensation. It may, in fact, be the
only S-behavior in our repertory. — But isn't this emphasis on the supposition ridiculous? This S-behavior amounts to practically nothing. — So
may the sensation named by "S" (if expressed by it) amount to practically
nothing. But we were supposing that it was important enough to keep a
record of.
   This disappointment with our expression — our wish or need to pass it
 by — came out differently a few sections earlier, in §260, just after Witt-genstein's remark about not being able to talk about "right". He has an
 interlocutor attempt to blunt the force of this remark by responding:
 "Well, I believe that this is the sensation S again." Wittgenstein turns
 upon him; he is supercilious: "Perhaps you believe that you believe it!
 Then did the man who made the entry in the calendar make a note of
 nothing whatever?" That is: Why are you so faint-hearted about your sensation — if, that is, you really have done the thing of noting it in your
diary? If you believe that the "S" notes the sensation, then you may
 equally believe that it does not. Then what is that stupidly insignificant
 mark doing just sitting there in your diary? To suggest that someone may
 have "made a note of nothing whatever" is to suggest that someone may
 have done nothing whatever. Anyway, if he has made a note of nothing,
 he certainly has not made a note. And what else could doing that —
 making the dumb mark — be doing? You might say he was doodling, and
 not merely on the ground that the "S" is small; doodles can be quite
 large and elaborate, and be done painstakingly. But could anything and
 everything a person does be doodling? Is this a fear which the fantasy of

=== p. 351 ===

a private language is meant to conceal? An anxiety that our expressions
might at any time signify nothing? Or too much? (Not that doodles themselves may not be significant — that others, that one oneself, may not learn
something from them. One learns about Dickens's Captain Cuttle from
the vocal doodle with which he habitually concludes his more portentous
observations: "Which when found make a note of." You just may hit
upon the significance of my doodling exactly an "S" over and over. So
might I; or I might believe that I have. Just as I might divine the significance of my neighbor's directing traffic in our empty street.)
   So the fantasy of a private language, underlying the wish to deny the
publicness of language, turns out, so far, to be a fantasy, or fear, either of
inexpressiveness, one in which I am not merely unknown, but in which I
am powerless to make myself known; or one in which what I express is
beyond my control. I do not expect that the idea of such fantasies will be
credited by anyone who does not share them, or is unaware that he or she
shares them, to some degree. One fantasy may appear as a fear of having
nothing whatever to say — or worse, as an anxiety over there being nothing
whatever to say. If one does to some degree share, or can remember sharing, this fantasy, I do not think one will find it necessary yet to ask for a
theory of expression with which to oppose it. The question, within the
mood of the fantasy, is: Why do we attach significance to any words and
deeds, of others or of ourselves? (To answer that this serves to explain
words and deeds would be like answering the question "Why do we obey
the state?" by citing the advantages of having a state. The level of the
question is: "How can anything we say or do count as disobedience to
the state — which does not amount to breaking the law, but to breaking
the hold of the law; and why does everything else we say and do amount
to obedience?") How can anything we say or do count as doodling, be
some form of nonsense; and why is all the rest condemned to meaning?
   A fantasy of necessary inexpressiveness would solve a simultaneous set
of metaphysical problems: it would relieve me of the responsibility for
making myself known to others — as though if I were expressive that
would mean continuously betraying my experiences, incessantly giving
myself away; it would suggest that my responsibility for self-knowledge
takes care of itself — as though the fact that others cannot know my (inner) life means that I cannot fail to. It would reassure my fears of being
known, though it may not prevent my being under suspicion; it would
reassure my fears of not being known, though it may not prevent my
being under indictment. — The wish underlying this fantasy covers a
wish that underlies skepticism, a wish for the connection between my

=== p. 352 ===

claims of knowledge and the objects upon which the claims are to fall to
occur without my intervention, apart from my agreements. As the wish
stands, it is unappeasable. In the case of my knowing myself, such self-defeat would be doubly exquisite: I must disappear in order that the
search for myself be successful.
    These words may express a significant truth. They form a homonym of
the truth, a kind of sentence-length pun, a metaphysical irony. If so, this
serves to explain why the writing on the part of those who have some acquaintance with the topic of self-knowledge — Thoreau or Kierkegaard
or Nietzsche, for example — takes the form it does, of obsessive and antic
paradox and pun, above all of maddening irony. As if to write toward
self-knowledge is to war with words, to battle for the very weapons with
which you fight. You may battle against the Christian's self-understanding
from within Christianity, as Kierkegaard declares, or from beyond Chris-tianity, as Nietzsche declares. In both cases you are embattled because you
find the words of the Christian to be the right words. It is the way he
means them that is empty or enfeebling. Christianity appears in Nietzsche
not so much as the reverse of the truth as the truth in foul disguise. In
particular, the problem seems to be that human action is everywhere disguised as human suffering: this is what acceptance of the Will to Power
is to overcome. I mention this without insisting upon it, and I hope without offense, because I find that it parallels a turn my recent argument has
 taken. I was led to express the fantasy of inexpressiveness as a sense of
 powerlessness to make myself known, and this turned out, in pursuit of
 the idea of a private language, equally to be a powerlessness to make myself known to myself. There seems to be some question whether one's
 knowing oneself is something active, something one does (like writing
 "S"), or rather something one suffers, something that happens to one (like
 having S). I believe that one will be inclined to say, supposing one accepts the presence of such a question, that the answer is, Both. Then one
 will have to say how there can be two sides involved.
    "The truth is: it makes sense to say about other people that they
 doubt whether I am in pain; but not to say it about myself" (§246). The
 favored implication of this remark is that it makes sense to say about
 other people that they know I am in pain; but not to say it of myself (except as a joke). This seems just to reverse the skeptic's passage that runs:
 he alone knows what is going on in him. Wittgenstein's remark is clearly
 weightless against the skeptic's claim that I can never know the experience of the other, since the remark says that I can know, i.e., that it makes
  sense to say so. And the skeptic must agree to this, because he takes its

=== p. 353 ===

negation to make sense, viz., that I never can know. For him this is not
as it were a conceptual impossibility but a hitherto undetected fact, and
obvious once you are brought to see it. The potential weight Wittgen-stein's remark carries against the skeptic is rather that, in speaking of
other minds, the skeptic is not skeptical enough: the other is still left,
along with his knowledge of himself; so am I, along with mine. (A first
difference from the case of skepticism with respect to the external world
is that an essential element of that skeptic's initial condition is absent,
viz., that no position for knowing is better than the one 7 am in. In the
case of other minds, it seems to make sense to say that there is a better
position; anyway, you do not know there is not. (Here especially I should
like to recommend the experience of John Wisdom's Other Minds.)) The
moral the "private" "language" "argument" would like for us to draw
may then perhaps be put as follows: there is no way for the skeptic to be
skeptical enough. (This sounds like a way of putting the moral of the
Cogito as well.) But what then? Should the skeptic just give up his skepticism, or should he, until he finds a way to go further, just refrain from
confessing it?
   The tone of Wittgenstein's remark (". . . it makes sense to say . . ."),
I would like to say, is this: "So much is true; it is obvious; not just obvious, but trivial." For it so far says nothing at all about why anybody
would deny what it says, nor about how anyone could (since to deny it
would make no sense). And it leaves open what the relation is that we
call "knowing the mind" — leaves open the possibility that knowing another mind is a matter of certainty (which will force us to the conclusion
that we cannot know another); and it leaves open the possibility that my
relation to my own mind is some unique species of intuition (which will
force us to pass over our expression). —What is the problem of the
other if it is not a problem of certainty?
   Let us recover a moment we left incompletely accounted for in reading
the parable of the boiling pot: "The image of pain certainly enters into
the language-game [with the words 'he is in pain'] in a sense; only not as
a picture." Why does the idea of an image present itself? And in what
sense does it enter in?
   "Image" naturally suggests "imagination". But not everything we call
imagination suggests a capacity for forming images; it is not the same as
imaginativeness. Imagination, let us say, is the capacity for making connections, seeing or realizing possibilities, but I need not accomplish this
by way of forming new images, or anything we are likely to call images
("Imagine how you would feel if . . ."; "Don't you really know why she

=== p. 354 ===

is angry with you? Use your imagination."; "You can imagine what
would happen if we dropped qualifying examinations for the Ph.D.").
Vivid imagery, in fact, may defeat the purpose. (Dickens, who was superlative in both capacities, both in imagination and in imaginativeness,
came to recognize this problem: he could get the Pecksniffs and Murdles
of the world to cry over the pictures he presented of poverty and the
deaths of children, but this did not get them to see their connection with
these pictures.) Imagination is called for, faced with the other, when I
have to take the facts in, realize the significance of what is going on, make
the behavior real for myself, make a connection. "Take the facts in"
means something like "see his behavior in a certain way", for example,
see his blink as a wince, and connect the wince with something in the
world that there is to be winced at (perhaps a remark which you yourself
would not wince at), or, if it is not that, then connect the wince with
something in him, a thought, or a nerve. "Seeing something as something"
is what Wittgenstein calls "interpretation"; it is the principle topic of
the chief section of what appears as Part II of the Investigations. By way
of anticipation, we can say that the "sense" in which an image enters into
the language-game in question is a sense of the concept of seeing; Witt-genstein will say that this concept is "modified" (p. 209).

   In looking more closely at this region of the Investigations, I do not
want to become fixated on the duck-rabbit. It is a beautiful and clear example; but of what? Not of psychological subtleties; not of all cases of interpretation; in particular, not all of aesthetic experience. It is one case
in which a figure can be read in alternative ways. The beauty of the
thing lies, first, in the fact that the figure is so patently all in front of
your eyes, it is nothing but outline, not even surface; second, that there
are just two distinct possibilities of reading it, and they compete with
one another; third, that no background of context is required (no imagination) against which to read it one way or the other; fourth, that you
can see, as patently as you can see the figure itself, that the flip from one
reading to another is due solely to you, the change is in you; fifth, that
the flip is reversible, and, in particular, subject to will; sixth, that the expression of its flipping for you is an expression of being struck by something, each time taken by surprise, though obviously not unawares; seventh, that you can understand that the flip may not take place at all, that
someone just may not see both possibilities. It is one of a series of examples with respect to which an unexpected range of concepts can be

=== p. 355 ===

given application and in which one is brought to sense the complexity of
their crossing — e.g., imagination, interpretation, experience, impression,
expression, seeing, knowing, mere knowing, meaning, figurative meaning.
   I remark, in passing, that the concept of figurative meaning — Wittgen-stein sometimes calls it secondary meaning — declares that investigation
of this region cannot proceed always by employing language-games and
the (a priori) agreement in judgment upon which they depend. Because
with figurative meaning there is no such antecedent agreement. You
could say that words used in such connections have no grammar — and
that would itself be a grammatical remark. A reflection of this lack of
common agreement here is the number of technical concepts Wittgen-stein introduces in the course of these pages, e.g., secondary meaning,
picture-face, aspects, aspect-blindness.
   I shall concentrate on just this thread: Wittgenstein says that the importance he is going to assess here is a categorical difference in different
"objects" of sight. He immediately introduces his term "noticing an aspect" whose ramifications he then allows himself to be led by. I point to
two late junctures in the progress of this notion of an "aspect": "The aspect presents a physiognomy which then passes away" (p. 210); and "The
importance of this concept [of aspect-blindness] lies in the connection between the concepts of 'seeing an aspect' and 'experiencing the meaning
of a word' " (p. 214). Putting together the ideas that noticing an aspect is
being struck by a physiognomy; that words present familiar physiognomies; that they can be thought of as pictures of their meaning; that words
have a life and can be dead for us; that "experiencing a word" is meant
to call attention to our relation to our words; that our relation to pictures is in some respects like our relation to what they are pictures of; — I
would like to say that the topic of our attachment to our words is allegorical of our attachments to ourselves and to other persons. Something of
this sort we were prepared for. My words are my expressions of my life; I
respond to the words of others as their expressions, i.e., respond not
merely to what their words mean but equally to their meaning of them. I
take them to mean ("imply") something in or by their words; or to be
speaking ironically, etc. Of course my expressions and my responses may
not be accurate. To imagine an expression (experience the meaning of a
word) is to imagine it as giving expression to a soul. (The examples used
in ordinary language philosophy are in this sense imagined.)
   One point of the allegory of words can be brought out this way. I said
just now: "My words are expressions of my life. . . ." Let us ask here, as
Wittgenstein asks of sensations (§411): Which words are my words? There

=== p. 356 ===

are obvious ordinary occasions for such a question: e.g., I am looking over
the constitution we have drafted to see how much of my contribution to
it has survived last night's redrafting. Few, I dare say, have it in mind
that they might own their very own set of words. But is it tempting to
suppose that one may own one's very own sensations? No one supposes
that another cannot enter an "S" into his or her diary just as well as you
can; I mean enter that "S", the very one you entered (the one we learned
in penmanship class, like a backwards treble clef). Does this misapply the
allegory? Should one say rather that one cannot have the other's having
of the sensation, as I cannot enter your entering of the "S"? Of course it
makes sense to say that I cannot enter your "S"-token in my diary. (Anyway it makes sense to the extent that "cannot" makes sense in that context.) So is the idea of "my sensation" expressed by saying "I cannot have
your sensation-token"? I feel: If this makes sense at all, it says rather more
or rather less than I wished to say. For I wanted to express my uniqueness,
and this way of expressing it makes it seem so trivial. If what I have got
 is a token of some type, then anyone else could have just as good a token.
 ("Yes, but they couldn't have this one." No, but that adds nothing at all,
 because that is just what "token of a type" means.) Is there, then, no
 problem at all about "my sensations" and whether others can have them,
 and therefore know them? Or is it that the allegory of words (here, speaking of "my sensations" by speaking of "my words") is at this point incomplete, fails to capture my uniqueness? We seem to have a choice. — This
 much seems to be true: The importance about my sensation is that I have
 it. The uniqueness in question points not to some necessary difference
 between my sensation and yours (for there may be no significant difference
  between them), but to the necessary difference between being you and
  being me, the fact that we are two.
     The idea of the allegory of words is that human expressions, the human
  figure, to be grasped, must be read. To know another mind is to interpret
  a physiognomy, and the message of this region of the Investigations is that
  this is not a matter of "mere knowing". I have to read the physiognomy,
  and see the creature according to my reading, and treat it according to my
  seeing. The human body is the best picture of the human soul — not, I
  feel like adding, primarily because it represents the soul but because it
  expresses it. The body is the field of expression of the soul. The body is
  of the soul; it is the soul's; a human soul has a human body. (Is this incomprehensible? Is it easier to comprehend the idea that it is the body
  which has the soul? (Cf. §283.) It does seem more comprehensible (though
  of course no less figurative) to say that this "having" is done by me: it is

=== p. 357 ===

I who have both a body and a soul, or mind.) An ancient picture takes
the soul to be the possession of the body, its prisoner, condemned for life.
   Contrariwise, taking the body to be the possession of the soul, its slave,
pictures the body as condemned to expression, to meaning. This seed of
conviction flowers one way in Blake's poetry, another way in Nietzsche's
Zarathustra. (In Blake's The Marriage of Heaven and Hell: "Man has no
Body distinct from his Soul for that calld Body is a portion of Soul dis-cernd by the five Senses, the chief inlets of Soul in this age".) It is, I take
it, this conviction, expressed by Wittgenstein as the body being a picture
of the soul, that Hegel gives philosophical expression to in the following
formulations: "[The] shape, with which the Idea as spiritual — as individually determined spirituality — invests itself when manifested as a
temporal phenomenon, is the human form. . . . [The] human shape [is]
the sole sensuous phenomenon that is appropriate to mind" (Philosophy
of Fine Art, Introduction, pp. 185, 186). (Thus may the philosophy of
mind become aesthetics.) How much you have to have accepted in order
to accept this expression is an open question, not confined to the reading
of, say, Hegel.

   Knowing a physiognomy is understanding what it means, having it
speak to you, "experiencing the meaning". How is this knowledge expressed? Sometimes I show myself struck by an aspect; sometimes I show
that it has dawned on me; I may show various forms of being taken by
surprise, depending on the case. But in no case is such knowledge expressed by a "mere report", except, presumably, when it has become a
piece of my history. Wittgenstein speaks of the expression of this knowledge of the other as my "attitude": "My attitude towards him is an attitude towards a soul" (p. 178). But why say that an attitude expresses
knowledge? Surely an attitude is merely something psychological and
caused whereas knowledge is something conceptual and validated. But
belief, say, is an attitude, and it is caused, if any psychological phenomenon can be caused, and validatable if any is. How are faith or pity or joy
different?
   (Hume and the other classical Empiricists were hardly unaware of the
difference between belief as something causable and as something validat-able. But because (or to the extent that) their work reads to us as prescientific psychology (which somebody or other has made scientific), and
because we suppose ourselves to know the difference between philosophical psychology and, as it were, psychological psychology, and because of

=== p. 358 ===

the Empiricist's desperate conclusions about knowledge, it is hard to recapture their intention, in their treatises of human knowledge, to be
locating knowledge as a psychological phenomenon, as a natural human
activity — so that it is likely to mean nothing to us, or to mean something
obviously false, to be told that a valid belief is one that is caused in a
particular way. (If the ability to make logical inferences has a psychology,
it will not be discoverable by a psychologist who cannot tell the difference
between valid and invalid inferences; it will not be the subject of inference which is under discussion. A comparable problem arises in the psychology, and/or psychoanalysis, of art. A thinker who cannot grant the
right autonomy to the object he or she is thinking about is not thinking
about art.) It may well be true that both philosophy and physics have
profited from their legal separation. It may well be false that either philosophy or psychology have profited from their legal separation, though
I do not say it was unnecessary.)
   However, I mean to lay the emphasis not on "attitude" but on the
necessity of "the expression of knowledge". Sometimes its expression will
consist in the provision of evidence, sometimes in the provision of analyses
or derivations. But sometimes "we cannot prove anything" (p. 227). Why
not? Wittgenstein speaks in this connection of "imponderable evidence".
 This means in effect, "I can't tell you how I know". This is ambiguous.
It may mean, "I don't know how I know; I just know", in which case you
 are apt not to be convinced that I do know, and in any case you will be
 interested in my claim only so far as you are interested in me. But it may
 mean, "I can't tell you". Perhaps I have taken your response to what I
have already said to mean that you are not interested in pondering the
 imponderable with me. This could be self-protective, and self-deluding.
 Or it could be an expression of my taking the evidence as all in evidence,
 drawing the line of instruction so that what I have pointed to is obvious,
 rock-bottom. Where and when I draw the line may seem to be, and it
 may be, arbitrary or dogmatic. Sometimes I am quite overcome by the
 sense that there is so little that can be said; perhaps nothing more than,
 "They can also be ears". This sense may itself make me seem, and be,
 arbitrary or dogmatic, while at the same time, perhaps as palliative, also
 charming or funny, or elegant — or fail to be. I would take such behavior
 to register that anxiousness I mentioned earlier, upon which instruction
 may founder: an awareness of the point at which the path of our communication depends upon your taking the next step, unaided by anything
 more from me save my belief in your readiness to take it. It is the mark
 of a good teacher in certain domains to know when to stop prompting,

=== p. 359 ===

domains in which further knowledge is earned not through further drilling but through proper waiting. It is a different form of exercise. People
are not equally good at this, certainly teachers are not equally good; but
one can learn to be better.
   Here is something I know but cannot prove: the closing image of For
Whom the Bell Tolls, the hero dying in a pine forest in Spain, holding
a rear-guard action alone to give his companions time for their retreat,
alludes to, or remembers, Roland's death in The Song of Roland. It is
not to be expected that everyone will credit this. I may wish to say nothing more, or I may wish to draw the line further along, perhaps saying:
The implication of the allusion would be that romantic love has come to
bear the old weight of patriotism; the only society left to love, to die for,
is the one we can create now, between us. One is, or ought to be, naturally
reticent about saying such things. And there are many reasons to hesitate
putting oneself in the position of having to consider saying them. No one
of the reasons need be that I am unsure of my knowledge; in the present
case I am not. I may hesitate because to say such things to you puts something into our relationship which I am not willing should be there. Or I
may not be willing either to risk your rebuff should you not agree or to
discover that we disagree here. Or I may not want to deprive you of the
knowledge — not just deprive you of the pleasures of discovery, but of
the pure knowledge itself, for if I tell you then my act itself gets mixed
 up in your knowledge. To unmix it you may have to turn your gratitude
for the knowledge into hostility toward me, to prove your independence.
And I may not be willing to bear that, either the hostility or the independence or that way of expressing independence. Knowing me would
have become as it were the price of that knowledge rather than, as it may
have been, a further effect of it. — Something of this kind is generally
not unfamiliar. There just are things which I want you to know but
which I do not want to tell you (certain of my wishes or needs perhaps).
One might say: I want you to want to know, and to want to in a particular spirit; not, say, out of curiosity. Such a wish goes into Thoreau's view
of friendship. It can be overdone.
   If I do tell you, then one or other reasons for hesitancy have been overcome. It may, for example, be of overriding importance to me to test the
 attunement of our intuitions, our agreements in judgment. Since I believe
 that philosophy can reach no further than these agreements, I am apt to
 be tempted to test them. (And I might write about film.)
   But why call such a thing as my claim about the Hemingway ending a
 piece of knowledge? Isn't it at best an intuition? But "intuition" here

=== p. 360 ===

g6o              SKEPTICISM AND THE PROBLEM OF OTHERS

would suggest that something or other may come along to confirm or dis-confirm the intuition. And I can envision nothing of the sort here — unless
one wishes to say that another person's agreement would confirm me.
Anyway, why not call it knowledge? Because it is not knowledge of a
matter of fact? Why is that special? Because in order to forgo my knowledge of a matter of fact I would have to bring under suspicion an unfor-seeable range of concepts and judgments in terms of which there are such
facts for me at all? But that is not unlike the way I feel about the Hem-ingway ending. — Perhaps I exaggerate. Perhaps the depth of my conviction is somewhat shallower than my conviction about the meaning of
certain poems of Blake which I am at the moment not willing to talk
about. But my conviction about the Hemingway is certainly deeper than
a feeling I have about The Red and the Black, that among the other
significances of the title colors, they are meant to match the colors on a
roulette table. That is, for me, hardly more than something one might
 call an open guess, which I may or may not some time attempt to confirm.
 If it is confirmed, then it is an insight (even if, as for all I know may be
 true, it has long been known or accepted by good readers of Stendhal); if
 it is disconfirmed, i.e., leads nowhere, then it is nothing, or almost nothing: it is obvious how (though not when) one might hit upon the idea,
 and it reveals next to nothing about me personally. An idea I have about
 myself cannot in this way be nothing; my false interpretations of myself
 are as revealing as my true ones.
    If my attitude towards him expresses my knowledge that he has a soul,
 my attitude may nevertheless not be very definitely expressed, nor very
 readily. It may take ages; it may be expressed now in the way I live. You
 may have to bear such an attitude towards me in order to credit that I
  bear it towards him, or towards you. It is an old fantasy, or a fact about
  an older world, that such knowledge was in the possession of certain
  communities, into whose secrets one may have sought initiation. Some
  people, strangely, take the University to be such a community — or perhaps take it as a reminder of such a community. — The word "attitude"
  can be misleading here. It is not, in the matters at hand, a disposition I
  can adopt at will. It is helpful to take the English word in its physical
  sense, as an inflection of myself toward others, an orientation which affects
  everything and which I may or may not be interested in discovering about
  myself.
     I can bear an analogous attitude toward myself. (This is a remark
  meant to characterize at once the idea of such an attitude and the idea
  of having a self.) I can, for example, be interested in my sensations, and

=== p. 361 ===

disinterested about them. If I say, for example, that I do not mind the
cold and offer you my jacket, does this necessarily mean that I am not as
cold as you? When Dickens depicts Mark Tapley's seasickness, he depicts
him as possessing just that sea of experiences possessed by everyone
around him, but without inflecting himself toward it as the others do,
e.g., without their sea-moans and their wild languors of misery; instead,
he moves about the ship, as it were in the valleys between swells of nausea,
attending to the others. This man does not even judge the others wanting
in not being able to inflect themselves his way. To me this seems an image
of freedom. It seems to me also an example of the possession, or exercise,
of a will. But here, I find, I am not thinking of the will as a kind of
strength which I may have more or less of, but as a perspective which I
may or may not be able to take upon myself. So one may say that the will
is not a phenomenon but an attitude toward phenomena.
   Draw the moral of the fantasy of a private language this way: The
natural importance of, say, a sensation's being mine — i.e., of my having
it, or rather of its being me who suffers it — is read philosophically as the
sensation's being uniquely mine, its being unpossessable by any other.
Then when Wittgenstein says, for example, "In so far as it makes sense
to speak of the same pain, it makes sense to say we both have the same
pain", this seems, within that philosophical reading, to diminish the
importance of the fact that I have it. He seems to trivialize my (inner)
life. — In a way this is true. I think one moral of the Investigations as a
whole can be drawn as follows: The fact, and the state, of your (inner)
life cannot take its importance from anything special in it. However far
you have gone with it, you will find that what is common is there before
you are. The state of your life may be, and may be all that is, worth your
infinite interest. But then that can only exist along with a complete disinterest toward it. The soul is impersonal.

  Almost at any moment one is likely to feel that any such thoughts about
the mind or soul are, where comprehensible, metaphorical. I have not, in
the way I have been expressing myself, been very eager to avoid encouraging such a feeling. Sometimes the feeling has lead to theories that mental
concepts are essentially metaphorical, as on the face of it, or just behind
the face, such concepts as "grasping an idea" or "holding a belief" or
"searching one's memory" are. What is the idea of metaphor here? If
someone says "The mind has mountains", I will not understand unless I
know that this is a metaphor (i.e., that it is meant metaphorically), and

=== p. 362 ===

not because its topic is the mind. It would not be quite right to say that
I must take it metaphorically, because it is not quite clear how else I
might take it. Sometimes the matter is not so clear. If I tell you that I
tripped him up or waved a red flag at him, I may not mean you to take
me literally. How then? Not metaphorically, because I could have put
these thoughts another way. (Cp. "Aesthetic Problems of Modern Philosophy", p. 78.)
   Recall the following cases:
"I noticed that he was out of humor." Is this a report about his behavior or his
state of mind? ("The sky looks threatening": is this about the present or the
future?) Both; not side by side, however, but about the one via the other.
[Investigations, p. 179]

Suppose one said: "But 'out of humor' is metaphorical, and its literal
source, moreover, is medieval psychology, hardly more than superstition.
So the example settles nothing. As for the sky's looking threatening, this
is a bit of animism, or some other pathetic fallacy. If you insist on saying
that it is about both the present and the future then the most you can say
is: it is figurative about the present (because the way the sky looks can
obviously be described literally), and literally about the future, anyway
a figurative way of making a literal prediction." In this mood, the following line of reply is not likely to be satisfying:
And how about such an expression as: "In my heart I understood when you
said that", pointing to one's heart? Does one, perhaps, not mean this gesture? Of
course one means it. Or is one conscious of using a mere figure? Indeed not. —
It is not a figure that we choose, not a simile, yet it is a figurative expression,
[p. 178]

It is open to us to reply: "But that one means a gesture settles nothing
about what it is one means. You can say 'This is a table' and point to the
table, but philosophers have taken themselves to know that what this
really means is a whole lot of predictions about possible experiences. Of
course, such a philosopher will allow you, in ordinary life, to avoid going
through the literal lay-put of your meaning and, for convenience, stick
directly with the common coin of abbreviation. Matters are worse when
it comes to such a gesture as pointing to your heart. Someone — and not
just a philosopher — may not accept your coin of abbreviation. The
whole point of such a gesture was that the other should accept the remark
that calls it forth. It was an expression of sincerity, its intention was a
moment of intimacy. So wouldn't it have been more effective to have
spoken more simply? And as for the figure not being one we chose, but

=== p. 363 ===

one, as it were, forced upon us, what is reassuring in that? Wasn't the
point of philosophy to see such force for what it is, and to weaken it? Next
we will be told that the true Enlightenment is not the effect of modern
science but began long before it." — If I had given the gesture referring
to the heart I would particularly resent the idea that I should have spoken
more simply. It would have been meant as the simplest of gestures.
— Differing Weltanschauungen seem to be in play.
   When I say that the underlying idea of the allegory of words is that
human expression, the human figure, to be understood, must be read,
surely there can be no doubt that that is merely a metaphor? But I ask
again: What is this idea of metaphor? The suggestion seems to be that
my expression must be translated into others, even perhaps reduced to
others. — Then this would be a kind of metaphor for the concept of a
metaphor. Certainly it is essential to an expression's counting as a metaphor that it can be paraphrased. It is equally essential that the paraphrase
not be treated as a reduction but rather as a certain sort of instruction.
If I had said "The human body is a text", then I would feel quite sympathetic to the claim that this is a metaphor and to the request for a
paraphrase. But I might have been using that remark as a simile, and I
could exhaust its content by saying, "I mean, it can be read". Must I go
on to explain? Suppose I say, "I mean, it can be interpreted, understood".
But this could have been the first explanation for my simile of the text.
And it seems to me not to exhaust the meaning either of "text" or of
"read". On the contrary, the idea of reading seems to tell me what kind
of understanding or interpretation I might aspire to. Then what I need is
not a paraphrase or translation of the word "read", but an account of
why it is that that word is the one I want — after which I may move away
from it or move on from it. (The willingness and the refusal to exchange
one word or expression for another, as well as the usefulness or futility in
doing so, are themes running throughout the Investigations.)
   Part of the reason I want the word "read" is, I feel sure, recorded in its
history: it has something to do with being advised, and hence with seeing.
But part of the reason has also to do with an intimation that I am to read
something particular, in a particular way; the text, so to speak, has a
particular tone and form. The form is a story, a history. You can tell who
someone is by describing him and saying what he does for a living, etc. If
you know the person, understand him, your knowledge will consist in
being able to tell his story. Generally we settle for an anecdote or two.
Some material objects have a story — the Maltese Falcon, for example, or
the Ring of the Nibelungen. Such a story will provide the provenance of

=== p. 364 ===

the object as well as an account of its origin, and give a list of its unique
properties. Remarks which read a body as giving expression to a soul may
be looked upon as myths, or fragments of a myth. (It has a body; it sees;
is blind; hears; is deaf; is conscious or unconscious. He was out of humor;
She struggled with herself; They fell in love; He lost his way.) And if the
soul is a central character in a myth, then the idea of "reading the body"
is part of that myth. I should imagine that a reason one feels certain
remarks about the soul to be metaphorical is that one does not want, or
know how, to speak of them as mythological. The mythological would
then be what the idea of the metaphorical here is a metaphor for. ("Only
of a living human being and what resembles (behaves like) a living human being can one say . . . it hears; is deaf . . . is conscious or unconscious." Can one say? One can imagine saying these things about a machine, e.g., one that uses antennae. Is this because the machine literally,
i.e., as a matter of fact, resembles (behaves like) a living human being? Or
has one first to anthropomorphize the machine in order to have these
descriptions called for? Should we say that such descriptions apply metaphorically to the machine? If so, then when someone thinks of them as
applying metaphorically to human beings it will be because they have
first automatized the human being. I think no one will wish to say that
such descriptions apply mythically to machines.)
    A happy feature of the suggestion that the soul is mythical, that remarks
 about the soul are fragments of a myth, is that it does not exclude the
fact that there will be arguments about it, especially about whether and
how it exists. This combination is true of the soul's companion, called in
 the myth its creator, the chief object of myth. Interpretations of the myth
and arguments concerning its subject's existence and nature would stand
 to the soul as theology stands to God. In a different world these studies
would be called psychology.
    Take the figure the myth calls Will. In some stories, or some regions
 of the myth, he is said to be free, in others not. Where he is not, he is held
 sometimes to be in bondage to God, sometimes to nature, sometimes to
 society, and sometimes he is held to be struggling against this bondage,
 sometimes not. If there is no continuation to the myth, freedom is almost
 sure to be unmanageable, because all it can mean is "at large", a condition
 which may at any time end. Or take the passage which says that the soul
 itself is a ghost in a machine. If that is all, we have an awfully short myth
 here, and the machine is bound eventually to be all that can sustain our
 attention. It is comparable to saying that God is the ghost over the machine. The machine is bound to be all that can eventually sustain our

=== p. 365 ===

prayers. Of course I do not doubt that there are people who believe these
myths, I mean people for whom these are the horizons.
   Myths generally will deal with origins that no one can have been
present at. In addition to God and the soul, society and the state are
important figures. Take the passage which runs: ". . . the state is a
ship . . .". This could be meant metaphorically, if one went on to explain
it by saying by whom the ship was constructed, and how it is powered,
and what the deck of the ship is, and what the purpose of its voyage is,
etc. But this is not where the interest in the idea lies. If this were its
interest, no one would suppose themselves actually to believe it, any more
than normal people actually believe that there are mountains in the mind.
It is a myth which expresses our sense that society is headed somewhere
(though we may feel adrift) and that someone knows where that place is
and how to get there and for that reason ought to be obeyed. You may
call this a myth as a way of calling it a lie. But this will not prevent
people from believing it (though it may encourage them to hide the
belief). (If, as Hobbes thought, metaphors were lies then people would
believe them as easily as not.) Not every way in which language fails to
meet facts is a lie. Better to call this myth nonsense, except that it is no
obvious kind of nonsense, and no one would accept calling it nonsense
who did not already fail to believe it. That the state is a ship is not merely
false, but mythically false. Not just untrue but destructive of truth. But
how could that be proved?
   Wittgenstein speaks explicitly of the mythological in the following
connection:

"All the steps are really already taken" means: I no longer have any choice. The
rule, once stamped with a particular meaning, traces the lines along which it is
to be followed through the whole of space. — But if something of this sort
really were the case, how would it help?
No; my description only made sense if it was understood symbolically. — I
should have said: This is how it strikes me. [§219]

(And of course this is not the end of the argument but its transposition
into another mode of discourse — the mode which includes, for example,
the expressions "This is the way we look at things" (about which Wittgen-stein asks whether it would constitute a "Weltanschauung' (§122)) and
"The likeness makes a striking impression on me" (p. 211).)

My symbolical expression was really a mythological description of the use of a
rule. [§221]

=== p. 366 ===

Here the mythological is not in competition, so to speak, with the literal.
To say "All the steps are really already taken" will not help you to understand what rules are and what it is to follow them if, say, you feel you
ought then to verify this fact. What this mythological description expresses is that the conclusion reached by a rule is always foregone. If you
still ask "What is forgone?", it may help to reply, "Freedom. At each
step the rule will dictate". So far this little mythology and the actuality
of following a rule can live happily together. But this is perhaps because
myth has here been given the last word.
    When myth and actuality cannot live together happily —when you
keep wondering too much, say, about where rules come from, then you
have stopped living the myth. Nor can you know in advance whether
interpretation and argument will be in harmony or, if in conflict, which
if either will emerge victorious. Either may cede vast tracts of territory to
the other and yet find some rocky corner in which to subsist. (Pieces of
the myth of philosophy keep cropping up; here, the part about its battle
with theology.) It may be the ambition of an ambitious philosophy to
unmask a field of myth. This can mean various things. It can mean just
showing that you do not really believe it (any longer); you believe science,
or anyway you believe somebody who believes science. It can mean what
Hegel did when he tried telling the entire myth of the soul, from origin
 to end (including the myth of origin and the myth of end), by inventing
a speech that he could call philosophy and in which he could tell the
soul's story as part of God's. It can mean what Nietzsche was doing in
 trying to break the myth of the soul, especially those parts about its origin
 (from nothing, by creation) and its existence (as opposed to the body) and
 its end (in a world beyond) — to break it by replacing it, or by removing
 the place for it, which meant breaking all our interpretations of experience, breaking belief, breaking the self.
    To speak of a fantasy of privacy is to speak of certain descriptions of
 privacy as fragments of a myth. We came across certain fragments at the
 beginning of this chapter, when it was noted that the idea of privacy,
 arising from the idea of the unknowable, is an impression of necessary
 secrecy and that secrecy and privacy share the idea of excludedness or
 exclusiveness. Let us try to tell more about this.
    Take the point at which one feels: "All I know is what the other says
 and does; what he is experiencing is something else. But he knows." And
 not only does he know, he must. My necessary failure of knowledge is his
 necessary success. Perhaps we should not speak here of his knowledge (ex-

=== p. 367 ===

cept as a joke). Perhaps we should confine ourselves to noting the sensation or mood or state that he is in, or has, and not go on to speak of his
knowing the sensation or mood or state he is in, or has (unless what his
"knowing" it means is that he is not unconscious of it). But why do we
not so confine ourselves? How can we not?
   Perhaps we are forced to the concept of knowledge here, hence employ
a forced concept of knowledge, because we do not quite know how to
speak of the other's aliveness to himself, his being together with himself,
by himself, in as it were a private place, a place he has to himself. (If there
is such a place, how could it be uninhabited?) A couple or a group can
retire, or retreat, to some place in which they can be private together. But
a region which is inaccessible to everyone, which cannot be inhabited
(say a particular mountain peak) would not be thought of as private
(unless perhaps it were thought of as the abode of the gods). (In The
Senses of Walden, I have argued (pp. 100-104) for an understanding of
the having of a self as an acceptance of the idea of being by oneself, and
an understanding of being by oneself in turn in terms of being beside
oneself (in, as Thoreau insists, a sane sense) as the climactic structure of
 Walden's vision, or mythology. It proposes an understanding of self-possession as a certain achievement of aloneness (call it oneness, or wholeness; Thoreau spells it holiness and says of it that it seeks expression).
The achievement requires learning to deal in certain secrets. Not, however, private, or rather personal ones, as if someone might in principle
keep them (as if for himself or herself); but, like the secrets of philosophy,
 always open ones, ones always already known before I present myself
to them.)
    He's in; I'm out. Is something keeping me out, excluding me? He could
be; he can keep his thoughts to himself, or speak of them in a private language, one with, for example, private allusions (which he has developed
over the years with his sister). He can hide his feelings. But in such cases
he can offer them, open them to me. — This much is obvious. But the
contrapositive is not obvious, and it is the point Wittgenstein keeps insisting upon: if the other cannot offer his thoughts or open his feelings
 then he cannot be hiding or keeping them either. They might of course
 be buried, and in some place where for the moment he cannot find them.
 If someone is hiding thoughts from himself then the fact that he cannot
 offer them to me is perhaps not of the first importance. In other cases
what he is doing may precisely be telling me precisely what he is thinking,
 only I am too busy to notice, or too something. For example, the line he

=== p. 368 ===

is tracing in the sand is not a doodle; it is a figure eight. He wants me to
know, or to care, that he ate something, or hates something.
    What is our idea of the necessary or metaphysical hiddenness of the
other? " 'What is internal is hidden from us.' — ... 'I cannot know
what is going on in him' is above all a picture. It is the convincing expression of a conviction" (p. 223). What is the conviction? What does the picture of internality, or of unreachable hiddenness, express? That the body
is a veil, or a blind, a dead end. — One had better take this as a symbolical expression which is a mythological description, because, among other
reasons, as we had occasion to notice, it is none too clear what the body
 would be if it could be seen through. Another such description which
 arises in thinking about other minds is that of a garden which I can never
 enter. But this expression is really (mythologically) about a particular
 quality of the other's mind (it is not, say, a jungle, or dump yard or
haunted house), and about a particular position I am in relative to it (say
 one of envy or disgust or fear). Such descriptions emphasize that I do not
 enter another's mind the way I enter a place. This is so far not much
 help; it does not distinguish either from entering, say, into marriage.
    The myth of the body as a veil expresses our sense that there is something we cannot see, not merely something we cannot know. It also expresses our confusion about this: Is what we cannot see hidden by the
 body or hidden within it? "Within it" suggests: it is some place in there,
 I don't know where. "By it" suggests: I know where, I just cannot get at
 it. So we do not know whether the body must be penetrated or turned
 aside altogether. Wittgenstein's expression "The human body is the best
 picture of the human soul" is an attempt to replace or to reinterpret these
 fragments of myth. It continues to express the idea that the soul is there
 to be seen, that my relation to the other's soul is as immediate as to an
 object of sight, or would be as immediate if, so to speak, the relation
  could be effected. But Wittgenstein's mythology shifts the location of the
 thing which blocks this vision.
     The block to my vision of the other is not the other's body but my incapacity or unwillingness to interpret or to judge it accurately, to draw
  the right connections. The suggestion is: I suffer a kind of blindness, but
  I avoid the issue by projecting this darkness upon the other. The con-vincingness of Wittgenstein's thought here will depend upon whether one
  is convinced by his relating the condition of what he calls "seeing an
  aspect" (hence what he calls "aspect-blindness") to seeing a likeness between physiognomies, which he cites as his motive in introducing the

=== p. 369 ===

topic of aspects in the first place. Aspect-blindness is something in me
failing to dawn. It is a fixation. In terms of the myth of reading the
physiognomy, this would be thought of as a kind of illiteracy; a lack of
education.
   The mythology according to which the body is a picture implies that
the soul may be hidden not because the body essentially conceals it but
because it essentially reveals it. The soul may be invisible to us the way
something absolutely present may be invisible to us. (I include "absolutely" to emphasize the point of the word "picture" in this connection.
Pictures are present at once, unlike music and plays and bibles and even
unlike statues. Interpretation, however, since it must reach a conclusion,
takes thought, hence time; the time may be as short as the first sensing of
dawn, or as long as learning the Talmud.) We may say that the rabbit-aspect is hidden from us when we fail to see it. But what hides it is then
obviously not the picture (that reveals it), but our (prior) way of taking
it, namely in its duck-aspect. What hides one aspect is another aspect,
something at the same level. So we might say: What hides the mind is
not the body but the mind itself — his his, or mine his, and contrariwise.
   Now we may see more of what is expressed in the myth of the body as
veiling or screening the mind. Something is veiled — the mind, by itself.
But the idea of the body plays its role. In the fantasy of it as veiling, it is
what comes between my mind and the other's, it is the thing that separates us. The truth here is that we are separate, but not necessarily separated (by something); that we are, each of us, bodies, i.e., embodied; each
is this one and not that, each here and not there, each now and not then.
If something separates us, comes between us, that can only be a particular
aspect or stance of the mind itself, a particular way in which we relate, or
are related (by birth, by law, by force, in love) to one another — our positions, our attitudes, with reference to one another. Call this our history.
It is our present.
   The fantasy of a private language, I suggested, can be understood as an
attempt to account for, and protect, our separateness, our unknowing-ness, our unwillingness or incapacity either to know or to be known. Accordingly, the failure of the fantasy signifies: that there is no assignable
end to the depth of us to which language reaches; that nevertheless there is
no end to our separateness. We are endlessly separate, for no reason. But
then we are answerable for everything that comes between us; if not for
causing it then for continuing it; if not for denying it then for affirming it;
if not for it then to it. The idea of privacy expressed in the fantasy of a

=== p. 370 ===

3?0               SKEPTICISM AND THE PROBLEM OF OTHERS

private language fails to express how private we are, metaphysically and
practically.

   The call upon history will seem uncongenial with Wittgenstein. He
seems so ahistorical. — He is ahistorical the way Nietzsche is atheistical.
(Gall these desires for awakening.) And aphilosophical in this way. Because what can come between us is, also, philosophy. There may be ultimate philosophical differences. But if there are they should not be caused
by philosophy itself.
   I said that one aspect is hidden by another aspect. Suppose we ask:
What is my relation to an aspect which has not dawned upon me, is in
that sense hidden from me, but which is nevertheless there to be seerif
What don't I see when everything is in front of my eyes? I find that I want
to speak of failing to see a possibility: I do not appreciate some way it
might be — not just some way it might appear, but might be. — But
isn't this emphasis really empty? For surely the figure is, as it stands,
already everything it can be, unless it changes. The interest of these pictures just lies in our knowledge that when they flip they do not change.
(" . . . what I perceive in the dawning of an aspect is not a property of
the object, but an internal relation between it and other objects" (Investigations, p. 212). This glosses Wittgenstein's initial broaching of the experience of seeing as, or of "noticing an aspect": "I contemplate a face,
and then suddenly notice its likeness to another. I see that it has not
changed; and yet I see it differently" (p. 193).) And if what I fail to see is
a possibility, then, since it can have no metaphysical status other than
the aspect I, as it were, succeed in seeing, what I do see is also a possibility.
Is this intelligible? It seems that I am going to have to say something like
this if I am to take seriously the suggestion that the dawning of an aspect,
and its presentation of a physiognomy, sketch the logic, I mean the myth,
of knowing another mind.
   But is it at all worth investigating ideas like seeing a possibility, or seeing an aspect as a possibility, or my relation to a hidden aspect, as part
of a reading of Wittgenstein? Isn't it on the face of it just against the
Wittgensteinian grain to say, for example, that I see a person as angry
who just is obviously angry, with no two ways about it? It amounts to saying that I interpret persons some way or another. And this seems to
amount to saying that I can, or generally, see human beings as human
 beings — as what they simply are! "One doesn't 'take' what one knows as

=== p. 371 ===

               BETWEEN ACKNOWLEDGMENT AND AVOIDANCE                      gyi

the cutlery at a meal for cutlery" (p. 195). — But I know what it means,
I am not in doubt whether I know what it means, to know what cutlery
is. (I could demonstrate its use to express my knowledge.) But I am in
doubt whether I know what it means to know what a human being is.
(What would express this knowledge? My attitude towards him, perhaps.
But what would express this attitude?)
   As for the implication, on the line I am following, that in knowing
others I am generally interpreting them, this is also not daunting. For
while the implication is that human beings are not, for example, cutlery,
the implication is not therefore that human beings are analogous to, i.e.,
like, optical illusions, or at any rate like ambiguous pictures. The idea of
the world as an artifact is, as Hume was pleased to show, a very poor
analogy. It is, however, a very good myth of the world, i.e., a very good
expression of the way, at certain times, it strikes me. This, in turn, will
seem to some a small concession to a traditional sensibility, a moment of
psychological back-sliding, which need not interfere with our cognitive
progress. But suppose "the way it strikes me" means "the way I cannot, at
certain.times, say on feast days, help seeing it". It is then as convincing
as, say, the picture of continental drift. One may wish to say that the idea
of continental drift used to be merely a picture (anyone could just see
that the facing coasts of Africa and South America were as if made for
one another). But now it is a fact. ("Quite as if the object had ended by
becoming something else" (Investigations, p. 206).) This points to a difference in these views of the world, in the way in which they are held. Once
convinced of continental drift, there is no competing picture of the formation of continents to which one is liable to revert. One sees here something of what scientific progress means. But to speak of seeing the world
as an artifact seems to presuppose some standing, competing way in which
it may be seen, a way to which one may revert, or convert. One may wish
to speak here of a spirit in which things may be seen, as of a spirit in
which words may be meant, and believed. And of course the spirit may
die out.
   The existence of the mind, or of the soul — the existence of beings — is
no more a hypothesis than the existence of God is. I do not so much wish
to say that we have no need of such a hypothesis as that we have no clear
employment for it. God's existence would not, I take it, be highly thought
of as an ad hoc hypothesis, as if to say: Our physical theory of the universe
is basically sound, and stronger than its competitors; there remain, however, certain persistent miracles which we must have an explanation for.

=== p. 372 ===

— If, however, God's existence were taken as a hypothesis in competition
with the hypothesis that God is dead, then the issue would be ready for a
crucial experiment.

   To speak sensibly of seeing or treating or taking persons as persons —
or of seeing or treating or taking a (human) body as giving expression to
a (human) soul — will similarly presuppose that there is some competing
way in which persons — or bodies — may be seen or treated or taken. Many
people, and some philosophers, speak disapprovingly of treating others,
or regarding them, as things. But it is none too clear what possibility is
being envisioned here. What thing might someone be treated as?
   What else could a person be other than a person? One might be a King.
It is reasonably clear what it means to treat a King as a King (Goneril and
Regan could not see the necessity once the King had, so to speak, abdicated), or for the King to wish to be treated as a man (Lear prays for this
with the onset of madness). But surely we are in no doubt that the King
is a person (at least one person), a human being? Things and goats aren't
Kings! But must a human being be something in addition, as it were, to
being the person he or she is — say a master or a slave, a parent or a child,
a writer, a weaver, a stranger? If there are special ways of treating persons
under such titles, that is because there are ways of behaving peculiar to
holding them. Is there some special way of behaving peculiar to human
beings as such? When religion and morality are moved to speak of duties
owed to others simply as persons, this does not imply that duties owed
 them under their special titles are as it were duties to non-persons. It is
 sometimes imperative to say that women or children or black people or
criminals are human beings. This is a call for justice. For justice to be
 done, a change of perception, a modification of seeing, may be called for.
But does it follow that those whose perceptions, or whose natural reactions, must suffer change have until that time been seeing women or children or black people or criminals as something other than human beings?
    It is sometimes said that slaveowners do not see or treat their slaves as
 human beings, but rather, say, as livestock; some slaveowners themselves
 have been known to say so. And it is said that some soldiers do not treat
 their enemies as human beings; soldiers themselves sometimes say so.
 Conservatives on the abortion question sometimes say that liberals do not
 regard human embryos as human beings; liberals seem forced to agree.
 — But does one really believe such assertions? My feeling is that they

=== p. 373 ===

cannot really be meant. Of course the words mean something; they are
not spoken at random. In what spirit are such words said?
   There comes a time when the institution of slavery cannot be justified
on any ground other than the sheer denial of the slave's humanity. There
was a time when the institution itself was thought good, or anyway went
unquestioned: for example, it was the harsh but legitimate exercise of a
conqueror's rights, one of the benefits of victory in war. But no one of
sound mind thinks, or has ever thought, that abortion is, of itself, good;
that it is one of the benefits of pregnancy, or a reason for intercourse.
Here is a reason I think I do not follow Roger Wertheimer, in the course
of his outstanding essay on what he calls the abortion argument, in his
likening (or his speculating about a likeness) of the slaveholder who fails
to see his slave's humanity with the condition of the liberal who fails to
see human embryos as humans. The most a liberal thinks is that abortion
is a moral option, that the cost in human suffering is immeasurably
greater without the option than with it, and that the state unwisely or
tyrannically exercises its police powers when it attempts to close off this
option. The time may have come when the option of abortion can only
be attacked on the ground that the human embryo is a human being.
(There was a time when it was generally attacked on the ground, and
when it was true, that it was too great a risk to the mother's health.) The
trouble with the ultimate attack is not merely that the argument that human embryos are human beings cannot finally be won, but that the statement that they are cannot fully be meant — which is not surprising if the
argument against it is exactly as strong as the argument in its favor. (I
assume that the statement need not rely on the doctrine that the embryo
has a soul. Here the liberal is likely to be left quite behind; this argument
will take place in other company.) This is not a matter of a lack of sincerity, but a matter of the lack of ways to express this sincerity. There is
just one definite thing the conservative does not want done to this embryo,
and nothing at all, or nothing more, he can want done for it. There is,
however, something clear he wants and something he sees and something
he feels. What he wants is for the embryo to be seen as a human being:
he wants the internal relation between human embryos and human beings
to strike you. He can see it this way, and demand this perception of you,
because he sees that the human embryo is human (not a human; but human as opposed, say, to wolf); you can also say that it is a human in embryo. This is enough to be struck by to found a feeling of abhorrence at
the idea that this life should be aborted. A person can understandably be

=== p. 374 ===

blind to these perceptions. I claim not to be, and yet I claim to be a
liberal on the issue of abortion — not merely tolerant of it but passionately in favor of its legalization, convinced that those who wish to oppose
it legally are tyrannical and sentimental hypocrites.
   Evidently I abhor other things more than I do abortion. What these
things are is anything but original, yet important to specify. Unjust laws,
for example; in this case, ones that discriminate against the poor and the
uneducated and the abandoned. And, for example, the facts of unwanted
or neglected children. That legal abortion is an alternative to unjust laws
and neglected children is a matter not of good logic but of bad institutions. If, for a start, society were so arranged that adopting a child were
no more difficult to cause than having a child; and that children were
adopted only by people who will continue to want them and will care for
them, and that there are enough such people to care for all the children
who need them, and that one knows how to tell who these people are; and
that any grain of shame or discrimination attached to bastardy or to the
fact of unwed motherhood or to parents who give their babies up for
adoption were itself seen to be shameful; and, supposing that contraception is known to be physically harmless to those who practice it, that it
were conscientiously practiced; and that women were supplied with expert and congenial help during pregnancy and the father entitled, with
 the mother, to parental leave from work, so that abortion need be sanctioned only if, and would always be granted if, there were a definite and
dire physical or psychological risk to the mother (the psychological risk
 should by now be confined to a terror of pregnancy and childbirth themselves); then my liberalism on the issue of abortion would fade, my abhorrence of abortion could flower. I might even imagine that there should be
 a law against it (if there were laws seeing to it that the minimum conditions I listed just now were put into effect), i.e., that the state has an interest in preventing it. My reason would not be that people who request
 and perform abortions are a danger to the unborn (that is reasonably obvious already) but that they are a danger to themselves, they imbrute
 themselves, and society along with themselves. But as a liberal I would
 still oppose invoking the police power on such a ground. So I am secretly
 imagining that if the conditions I envision were in effect there would be
 no cases of voluntary abortion, anyway no more than there now are of
 voluntary suicide. — The upshot of these considerations is that the abortion argument, so far as it is based on the status of the human embryo, not
 only cannot but must not be won. Voluntary abortion is less bad than its
 criminalization is; but it is not therefore all right. The more terrible one

=== p. 375 ===

takes it to be, the more terrible one should take its indictment of society
to be. It is a mark of social failure, not unlike the existence of prisons.
   It follows that I do not think that performing an abortion is a case of
premeditated murder, and, in particular, murder of the most innocent.
And in saying that the conservative cannot fully mean that human embryos are human beings I am saying that no conservative of sound mind
abhors those who request and perform abortions as he would or should
abhor Herod and the minions of Herod — at least as he would a discriminating Herod, one who slated the slaughter only of those children he did
not want, or found inconvenient. Herod must at all costs be stopped. I do
not say that all the conservative feels is mere disapproval or distaste, as at
something despicable or ugly, and that he merely wishes to legislate his
moral tastes. (I do not rule this out, either.) I have already claimed to see
room for abhorrence. It is like the abhorrence one would feel toward a
people who left their dead untended, either left them in their tracks, or
threw them out with the rubbish. This is bad; it is imbruting; there ought
to be a law against it; but it is not murder.
   To justify, as it were, my lack of belief in the claim that the human
embryo is a human being, i.e., my belief that this is not fully or seriously
meant, I have had to sketch the lines along which these words are meant,
what people who are led to say them want and see and feel. Is this what
I have to do in order to justify my lack of belief in the slaveowner's claim
(made perhaps by him, but in my circle of acquaintances, made only for
him) that slaves are not human beings? Isn't all that I, who know that
slaves are human beings, can tell him is what it means to want and see
and feel human beings to be human beings? And I am not sure that I can
do this. I am not sure, as was said, that I know what it means to know this.
I can tell what the conservative imagines me to be missing about the human embryo because I can tell, or believe myself to be able to tell, what
he is not missing; indeed, I have claimed to share it, though not to add
 things up his way. But is the slaveowner missing something I am not missing? I think not; not in this way. He may know roughly everything about
human beings that I know. He might even describe them with subtlety in
the romances he composes on lazy summer mornings.
   What he really believes is not that slaves are not human beings, but
that some human beings are slaves. No argument there, is there? Since he
has some it follows that there are some. No, but this man sees certain human beings as slaves, takes them for slaves. He need not claim that all
such persons ought to be in slavery, merely that it is all right if some are.
But he is wrong. A person of sound mind can feel that this man — this

=== p. 376 ===

perhaps likeable man, this family man, affectionate with the usual animals and children — must at all costs be stopped, if he touches you.
    But if this man sees certain human beings as slaves, isn't he seeing
something special, not missing something (he doubtless thinks I am missing something)? What he is missing is not something about slaves exactly,
and not exactly about human beings. He is rather missing something
about himself, or rather something about his connection with these people, his internal relation with them, so to speak. When he wants to be
served at table by a black hand, he would not be satisfied to be served by
a black paw. When he rapes a slave or takes her as a concubine, he does
not feel that he has, by that fact itself, embraced sodomy. When he tips a
black taxi driver (something he never does with a white driver) it does not
occur to him that he might more appropriately have patted the creature
fondly on the side of the neck. He does not go to great lengths either to
 convert his horses to Christianity or to prevent their getting wind of it.
 Everything in his relation to his slaves shows that he treats them as more
or less human — his humiliations of them, his disappointments, his jealousies, his fears, his punishments, his attachments . . . .
    So what is this about "not human beings"? How would our more or less
 mythical slaveowner mean this? What do we imagine that he wants and
 sees and feels in saying it? He does not mean that his slaves, anyway not
 all of them, are less intelligent or lazier than he. (He may think such
 things, and worse, about his son.) He does not mean that they are less
 beautiful or less well-mannered than his friends. (He may think worse,
 in these terms, of white trash.) He means, and can mean, nothing definite.
 This is a definite frame of mind. He means, indefinitely, that they are not
 purely human. He means, indefinitely, that there are kinds of humans.
  (It is, I take it, to deny just this that Marx, adapting Feuerbach's theology,
  speaks of man as a species-being. To be human is to be one of humankind,
  to bear an internal relation to all others.) He means, indefinitely, that
  slaves are different, primarily different from him, secondarily perhaps different from you and me. (I assume here, I believe, that no racist psychology or anthropology, however it may comfort him, really satisfies him as
  expressing this indefinite difference.) In the end he will appeal to history,
  to a form, or rather to a way, of life: this is what he does. He believes
  exactly what justice denies, that history and indefinite difference can justify his social difference of position. He need not deny the supremacy of
  justice; he may be eloquent on the subject. He need deny only that certain others are to be acknowledged as falling within its realm. It could be
  said that what he denies is that the slave is "other", i.e., other to his one.

=== p. 377 ===

               BETWEEN ACKNOWLEDGMENT AND AVOIDANCE377

They are as it were merely other; not simply separate, but different. It
could also be said that he takes himself to be private with respect to them,
in the end unknowable by them.
   The slaves may have secrets from the master; doubtless they do. But the
master has something more. Power over the slaves, of course, but something more. Call it power over his experience in relation to them. He may
acknowledge everything about them, I mean reveal his true feelings to
them, about everything from their suffering to their sense of rhythm, with
the sole exception of their existence in the realm of justice. They may acknowledge a limited amount to him (to withhold all expression of their
feeling, even of the blues, would be dangerously defiant), but nothing
about him, to him, except as acknowledgment of his mastery. But should
he cede, or they find, the power to acknowledge him, to see him as other
to their one, power to see his experience as he sees it, then he would see
himself through their eyes, and they would know that they had seen themselves through his, and he would number his days. — It may be that
Southern slavery, as has been claimed, was the severest form slavery had
ever taken in human history. But if, as has been assumed in my fictitious
little history, the justification for it was pushed to its final ground— that
the slave is not a full human being — then that human misery represented
an awful form of human progress; for that ground cannot in the long run
be maintained. There are various reasons for regarding the American
Civil War as a tragedy. One respectable reason would be to regard it as
having been unnecessary, to suppose that slavery was becoming psychically
insupportable on the part of the slaveowners. Now if it were shown that
what was making the institution insupportable was not alone a sense of
guilt (which might be lived with for millennia, given sufficient means for
relieving it, say dramatic acts of benevolence), but an increasing effort to
mean something that cannot be meant, producing a sense that the mind
itself was about to overthrow itself; and if this psychic development were
shown to have been proceeding with all deliberate speed, so that, left to
itself, without being forced to self-justification in the face of sanctimonious criticism, it would have reached fruition and freed itself from slave-holding by Palm Sunday of 1865, then the Civil War was perhaps tragic
because unnecessary, rather than tragic because necessary.
   The anxiety in the image of slavery — not confined to it, but most
openly dramatized by it — is that it really is a way in which certain human
beings can treat certain others whom they know, or all but know, to be
human beings. Rather than admit this we say that the ones do not regard
the others as human beings at all. (To understand Nazism, whatever that

=== p. 378 ===

will mean, will be to understand it as a human possibility; monstrous, un-forgiveable, but not therefore the conduct of monsters. Monsters are not
unforgivable, and not forgivable. We do not bear the right internal relation to them for forgiveness to apply.) To admit that the slaveowner regards the slave as a kind of human being bases slavery on nothing more
than some indefinite claim of difference, some inexpressible ground of exclusion of others from existence in our realm of justice. It is too close to
something we might at any time discover.
   I have not wished to argue from the fact that it is correct to say that
one can see and to a certain extent treat human embryos as human beings
that it follows that human embryos are not human beings; nor to argue
from the fact that another can see and fully treat certain human beings as
slaves that it follows that human beings are not slaves. I have wished to
say that it is not a fact that human embryos are human beings and that it
is nothing more than a fact that certain human beings are slaves. This
may be taken to suggest that someone who expresses himself or herself
otherwise inhabits a particular Weltanschauung; that the world, and himself in it, has struck him in a particular way. It may equally be taken to
suggest that someone who thinks as I do has failed to have, or anyway has
not had, the world strike him in this way. (Is this, too, a Weltanschauung?)
It is neither true nor false, it is not a fact, that the duck-rabbit is (a drawing of) a duck. If someone says, credibly, of the duck-rabbit, "It's a duck",
then the fact seems to be that it is true /or him that it is a duck. But "true
for him" apparently invites a contrast with "true for me". Yet the fact
does not seem to be that it is true /or me that it is a duck-rabbit. That it
is a duck-rabbit just is the fact of the matter. So what is the difference, or
contrast, in our positions?

   If it makes sense to speak of seeing human beings as human beings,
then it makes sense to imagine that a human being may lack the capacity
to see human beings as human beings. It would make sense to ask whether
someone may be soul-blind. (If there is such a thing as soul-blindness,
slaveowners and liberals are neither necessarily nor peculiarly subject to
it. Though someone might become a slaveowner or a liberal in order to
disguise this fact about hims'-li.)
   — Do you really want the whole burden of Wittgenstein's concepts here?
Remember his introductory description: "I contemplate a face, and then
suddenly notice its likeness to another. . . . I call this experience 'noticing an aspect'." So to speak of seeing human beings as human beings is

=== p. 379 ===

to imply that we notice that human beings are human beings; and that
seems no more acceptable than saying that we are of the opinion that
they are (cf. Investigations, p. 178). — What is implied is that it is essential to knowing that something is human that we sometimes experience
it as such, and sometimes do not, or fail to; that certain alterations of consciousness take place, and sometimes not, in the face of it. Or in the presence of a memory of it. The memory, perhaps in a dream, may run across
the mind, like a rabbit across a landscape, forcing an exclamation from
me, perhaps in the form of a name. (Cp. Investigations, p. 197 and cp.
Yeats's "A Deep-Sworn Vow".)
   I have spoken of there being a spirit in which words may be meant. I
would like to say that the Tightness in describing "I noticed that he was
out of humor" as a report about his behavior and his state of mind — "not
side by side, however, but about the one via the other" — trades on a spirit
in which we imagine these words said and meant. But if there is such a
spirit, is it a function of the fact that this expression is figurative or that
its content is about a creature? I would like to say that "He's waving
goodbye" partakes of the same spirit, and "He's favoring his arm again",
and "He is in pain".
   Could there be people who could never achieve the spirit in which
words about another (mind) are meant? Would this mean that they understand someone who expressed an intention or aspiration always as making
a prediction? Or that they understand someone who expressed pain as
showing that he was not in good working order? Is the spirit so fragile?
What would make us, how could anything make us, shrink from it? — If
the possibility about others that daunts you is that anything they can express they can feign, even that others may at any time and for no reason
simulate their responses, this will lead you only, so to speak, to an epistemological agnosticism, not to a metaphysical skepticism, not to a surmise
that perhaps there are no human beings. For surely nothing other than a
human being, or something awfully like a human being, could simulate
human responses? Suppose someone wished to convert this question into
a refutation of skepticism, as follows: Either what is before you — the
humanish thing you wish to say is in pain — is simulating or it is not. If it
is not, then it is in pain, and hence is a human being; if it is, then it is
simulating, and hence is a human being.
   To imagine that something could simulate human responses is to imagine that something could simulate being human. This would presumably
mean that this thing could appear in human guise, in a human body. The
human race used, apparently, easily to imagine that gods and angels could

=== p. 380 ===

                 SKEPTICISM AND THE PROBLEM OF OTHERS
so appear; more recently that aliens from another heaven might. It used
also to imagine that humans and gods might appear in the guise of animals, either through metamorphosis or metempsychosis. But only figuratively has it been imagined that an animal might appear in human guise —
as though it is an unbreachable point of grammar that a soul is at least as
high in the scale of being as the body it happens to inhabit. The soul may
live beneath itself, but never above; it can only be dragged down.
    Could it be that human beings are in human guise? Suppose that there
are in our world such things as human guises, "bodies" that for all the
world seem inhabited but happen not to be, i.e., seem to be human beings
but happen not to be. They may have as it were the metaphysical status
of zombies or golems, but empirically they may be much livelier and do
just about anything human beings can do —not just calculate and play
chess, say, but also flirt and court and laugh and cry, or anyway shed tears,
or at least produce tears, even ones of iron and salt. Now suppose there
used to be a way of inhabiting guises, a way for human beings to don
 them for a time should they wish to. At first people might have donned
them in order to play a variety of practical jokes, but eventually in order
 to take other advantages a guise affords. You could, for example, choose
"your" looks and figure. Moreover, the guise makes accessible to you the
release of emotion that masks do, and without the inconvenient evidence
of the mask. Some people would grow reluctant to leave the bodies they
 had inhabited. Suppose that after a period of inhabitation it becomes impossible, physically or psychologically, to leave your body. Or impossible
 without dying.
    Suppose now that the knack of donning guises appeared and disappeared long enough ago so that the period of trial inhabitation is past.
 All who are now inside human guises are stuck inside for life. The only
 way to be certain now whether a body is or is not inhabited would be to
 open it up and look inside. We would not often open live bodies for this
 purpose (though we would often have the impulse to) because of our
 knowledge that it causes the death of the one inside. Indeed the concept
 of death seems to be absorbing the idea of leaving the body. — We might
 have an idea that evolution could have taken a hand in this process of
  inhabitation, that the key to human survival, i.e., survival as a human
 being, turned out to be the forming of a body-shell around the fetus before the term of birth. After a while, nature could become so artful that
 you could never tell a human guise from a human being. The shell became skin thin, and when you opened it up you found no separate human
  being but merely what you would expect to find if you opened an old-

=== p. 381 ===

fashioned, unshelled human being. (This is of course what our records
mostly do show, because this point of human evolution would have been
reached before the point of writing. Sometimes it even seems hard, in the
face of this (lack of) evidence to imagine how we were fortunate enough
ever to have formed the idea of the one inside, grasped the truth of the
matter. One might regard the artfulness of nature in this instance to have
defeated itself, because now the body is no longer a protection for the human being. The one inside suffers everything that happens to the body,
and more besides. — The state of the evidence paves the way for a new
breed of unbeliever, people who do not relate the past this way, or rather
not to this effect. What they like to say is, "There is no one inside". But
this only keeps alive the impulse to look.
   Is it that we take ourselves for (possibly) inhabited bodies, human beings in undiscardable human guise? — when, that is, we feel that to know
the reality of the other we have to get past his body to him, that what is
really happening is hidden from view, in a place we cannot enter. If this
is the way things are, I am in no better position with respect to myself
than you are. Since the knack of donning and casting off the new guise
disappeared long enough ago, I have no better way than you of telling
whether my body is, or once was, a human guise or whether it is really
mine, my original one, whether this is all there is. I cannot, so to speak,
tuck in my head and look around; I cannot lay hands on myself any more
intimately than you can. And memory here would be a thin reed. None of
us remembers our birth even though each of us knows that he or she is
natal, so to speak. Do we not?
   Suppose I become convinced, come to harbor the suspicion, that my
body is a guise, not my original. I am harboring the idea that this body
is "mine" in something like the way my clothes are mine; but it is not —
what shall I say? — me (except at best the way certain clothes may be
really me, my dear). It is my (inalienable) possession, but it does not express me, not the real me. My protection has become my encumbrance. In
such a state I may be glad to hear that there is, despite all, a way to cast
it off.
   If I harbor the suspicion only about others and hence harbor the temptation to want to penetrate the other, to see inside, my impulse is to want
a way of comparing what the other shows with what is actually going on
in him. This again takes the problem of other minds to be of a familiar
epistemological form, the form bequeathed by Kant, following Locke and
Leibniz, according to which I am sealed within my circle of experiences,
never (under my own power) to know whether those experiences match

=== p. 382 ===

an independent reality. If I harbor the suspicion about myself, I want to
escape this body not, pretty clearly, in order to compare (or rather correlate) the responses it shows with the responses I have — correlate its responses with mine inside — but simply to reveal my responses. As if unless
the responses I reveal are the responses of the body that is me, I am not
expressed. But why should I want this, want it perhaps enough to die for
it by leaving this body?
   Is it that I want to be known, that is, to be acknowledged? But what in
this is of mortal importance? Is it a matter of wanting my existence confirmed, i.e., the existence of my sufferings and of my deeds? But why
would I imagine that they are not acknowledged, never confirmed? I had
occasion to ask: If I do not accept the criteria you manifest as revealing
something true of you — if, e.g., I invariably distrust your manifestations
of suffering — then is this a distrust of you (of your capacity to give yourself expression) or of myself (of my capacity as a knower of others, as a
reader of expressions)? Now if I distrust your acknowledgment of me, fail
to believe in any manifestation of sympathy or of praise, am I distrusting
you (your capacity as a knower of others) or myself (my capacity to give
myself expression)?
   How can I fail to believe in my expressions of myself, my capacity to be
able to present myself for acknowledgment? I have this pain, I am proud
or ashamed of this deed, humiliated by that thought. But if I fail to believe in the other's acknowledgment of me, must I be failing to believe in
the other's capacity to accept these facts, to measure their reality for me,
perhaps to share them? And must this mean that I do not believe the
other knows what these feelings are? But the other may perfectly well
know. — But only for himself, the weight of his own feeling. — But it
may be no different from yours. — But it does not matter to him the way
it matters to me. — How do you know? And suppose it were true. Isn't
 that a potential benefit of conveying your feelings to him, to assess their
mattering? Perhaps you do not want them to matter to him. If you do,
you must let them. — Let them? When all I can do is to groan, to weep,
 to laugh, to rage, to talk, to talk, to talk! All this is not what I feel, not
who I am. — You mean, I think, that you cannot produce in others the
responses you imagine would satisfy you. You cannot enact your character, play your own life. Or perhaps you can. But then the responses you
produce in the other are apt to be directed to the wrong thing, to the part
you have enacted, not to you yourself. It is as an alternative to the wish
 to produce the response in the other that I claimed you must let yourself

=== p. 383 ===

matter to the other. (There is a very good reason not to do so. You may
discover that you do not matter.) Take this as advice to Hamlet. — To
let yourself matter is to acknowledge not merely how it is with you, and
hence to acknowledge that you want the other to care, at least to care to
know. It is equally to acknowledge that your expressions in fact express
you, that they are yours, that you are in them. This means allowing yourself to be comprehended, something you can always deny. Not to deny it
is, I would like to say, to acknowledge your body, and the body of your
expressions, to be yours, you on earth, all there will ever be of you.

   It seems to me possible that there are persons who understand their
bodies as their possessions, as perhaps their chattel. Doubtless they regard
the body as a special prize among their possessions. How they treat it will
determine whether they are kind masters or cruel. Or perhaps they will
prove merely greedy. Speaking of the body as a possession may be a way
of asserting certain rights one has with respect to it. But I claim to have
rights with respect to my wife and child, to go no further; yet I hope I do
not claim to own them. If what I own is a guise, then I can own it whether
or not I am in it. The first man in the iron mask was as surely in it as the
man who subsequently came to be in it; the second had it made; it was
made for the first. Who owns it? Not the ironsmith who mixed his labor
with it. The edification is: cause no habitation to be built that you do not
wish to live in. If there were an assignment of guises to angels, there
would be bickering in heaven. — An idea that wants expression here is
that one's body should not be subject to an alien will (e.g., submitted to
an unwanted term of pregnancy?). But why conclude that one's body
should be subject to one's own will?
   A better relation to the body is expressed by saying that I am the body's
possession, I am of it, it has claims upon me. That I can mistreat my body
does not show that I stand to it in the role of master or mistress. For I can
mistreat my master or mistress, e.g., by betraying them. What does it mean
to be in control of one's body? If I am in control of my bank then only I,
no one else, can determine what it shall do. To say I am in control of my
body might, similarly, mean that no one else is in my position with respect to it, that it is, say, under my hypnotic spell. But if I am at one with
my body, say in the accomplishment of a virtuoso performance or in acts
of love, does this mean that I am perfectly controlling my body or that I
am in the perfect control of my body? Mightn't the answer be either

=== p. 384 ===

Both, or Either? For any performance or deed can be done through will
or through grace. Their physiognomies will differ accordingly, as for example early Horowitz differs from late.
   If I say that any action can be done actively or passively, then I should
say that an action done through will is done passively. I realize that one's
first intuition here, supposing the issue is clear enough to excite intuition,
is likely to run the other way. But that would be the will's doing. To act
through will is to be commanded by oneself, perhaps driven; it is to be a
good soldier. No doubt this is in general better than being a bad soldier.
But it is still not being the initiator of one's commands, hence not being
in a position, no matter what one's private feelings, of countermanding
them. (In Lear and in Pericles it is a good soldier who, I assume without
malice, but with reluctant bearing, accepts a commission to murder an inconvenient daughter. Conscience does not issue commands.)
    Kant, I take it, was of the opinion that the best one can hope for in
our present circumstances is to be commanded by the will, and he called
this freedom. Nietzsche called it suffering, passiveness, on the ground that
our will is not, not yet, our own. So he undertakes to instruct us in redirecting the will in order that we may become active, free of reluctance.
Because it is natural for us to frame our ideas of personal rights in terms
of private ownership, Nietzsche, like Thoreau, frames his instruction in
terms of possessing something, coming into possession of something, in
order to wrest our notion of ownership from our grasp. His Zarathustra
 speaks of coming into the possession of his light, his food, his kind of ears,
his tongue, his hand, his foot, his stomach, his taste, his way, his enemy,
 his war, his death. Not surprisingly, he is accused, like Thoreau, of selfishness, or anyway of egotism. But what each of them claimed to possess deprived no one of anything. Yet in the face of them others have felt deprived. — Compared with Thoreau, Nietzsche seems too spiritual, all
 but Christian. Because the sun, say, or the body of water Thoreau claimed
was his (and might therefore be anyone's or no one's) was the sun and
 this body of water. Common things, merely not held in common.
    If not as owner, do I stand in some other relation to my body? We speak
 of standing in various relations to our selves, e.g., of hating and loving
 ourselves, of being disgusted with or proud of ourselves, of knowing and
 believing in ourselves, of finding and losing ourselves. And these are relations in which we can stand to others.
    — No, not in this way. In a relation to myself there is no reciprocity. Or
 rather, in each relation reciprocity is assured. — Surely not assured? If
 I love myself am I loved by myself? Can I love myself back? Narcissus did

=== p. 385 ===

not die of love but of love unrequited, or unrequitable. Yet if there were
no reciprocity, how could I struggle against myself? — Stop struggling
and the struggle is over. — But with others the one who stops struggling
has lost. — And how is it otherwise with oneself? Is it that in this struggle winning is losing and losing is winning? That sounds non-existent.
— There are outcomes to a struggle other than victory and loss. You make
a struggle sound like a game. It is true that you cannot play a game with
yourself. —Not at any rate without putting aside a knowledge of my
strategies.
   — Would you at the same time care to put aside these metaphors? We
have allowed ourselves to speak as if the self could literally be divided.
But it is not a quantity of something; not like bread or a parcel of land.
— A house can be divided; I mean the community of dwellers in the
house. That is not just a case of a lot of individuals feeling different ways.
It is a case of one thing feeling different ways. — That is the Northern
point of view. The Southern view is that there are two things each feeling its own way. — What I thought you wanted to give expression to a
while ago, and so did I, is the circumstance that my self is just that to
which I must stand in these relations, fated to; all of them; or at any rate
one of each pair, love or hate, being proud or contemptuous of, honest or
dishonest with, at war or at peace. If this is how one thinks of the matter
then there is no help for it, but we must simply go through the possibilities. Immediately one discovers certain anomalies. — Evidently. A
relation takes two. — Identity does not take two; anyway not two things.
Still, I gladly forgo the relations which in fact take two. I will not say that
one may be father to oneself (except metaphorically or mythically), nor
take leave of oneself or greet oneself, nor take oneself for a walk, nor pardon oneself (unless one has a terrific title among one's names). I cannot
cast your shadow; at least not upon myself.
    To say that I am fated to stand to myself in the relations in which I
may or may not stand to others is to make the contrast between myself
 and others in a particular way: any other is one whom I may just not
know, have no relation with; but I cannot just not know, or have no relation with, myself. Ignorance of myself is something I must work at; it is
something studied, like a dead language.
    Isn't this an exaggeration? — like the remark a while ago that I am
 fated either to love or to hate myself, either to be proud or contemptuous
of myself, either to be at war or at peace, etc.? Most people, surely, are
neither the one nor the other exactly. But this need not be understood as
 denying the point, for this "neither the one nor the other exactly" may

=== p. 386 ===

g86              SKEPTICISM AND THE PROBLEM OF OTHERS

describe a specific position along a dimension of self-relation which I am
fated to occupy. Call the positions most people occupy along all the logically applicable dimensions of self-relation their positions of averageness.
(More or less obviously, I am trying from time to time to decipher what it
is in Heidegger's views that I find valuable and intelligible.) This flattening of the self seems to call for another dimension. If I stand in these relations to myself, then relating myself to myself is something I am doing,
something I must take a stand upon, actively or passively. Then the position of the self's averageness is itself one to which I relate myself, one
upon which I must take a stand, perhaps an average stand. Perhaps I take
an average stand on some sense that my positions of self-relation are something special. Perhaps I take an average stand to the effect that average-ness is itself special, even glamorous, something like the position of Tonio
Kroger.
    It is said that there are occasions on which, if I am to be forgiven, I
must forgive myself. On such occasions, forgiveness would have to be
forthcoming without the condition of apology, since I cannot apologize
to myself. Could I forgive myself, as I might others, for not being able to
 apologize? If I can love myself, I suppose I can be jealous of myself, regard myself as my possession and carefully monitor my possession's company. (Like God.) But could I envy myself? If not, then if I envy Tonio
 Kroger it follows that I am not Tonio Kr6ger. If what Tonio Kroger
 envies in Hans Hansen is his averageness, then if his own averageness is
no different would logic debar him from this envy? Not if — of course —
 he failed to recognize his own averageness (a failure he might have cultivated by developing the envy) or perhaps not if he wished to think of the
 other as happy because of his averageness. One may find nowadays that
 a certain envy of Hans Hansen is expressed only by Hans Hansens. But
 doesn't this just mean that certain people would like to think of themselves as artists, or think their failures the failures of an artist? And also
 that Hans Hansen, were he created today, would seem less enviable?
 — You just mean that today a certain happy bourgeois would like to think
 of himself as unhappy. Then why not just say that Hans Hansen logically
 cannot envy Hans Hansen, at least not without dividing his consciousness?
 — Perhaps because I am afraid that only a happy bourgeois would say so,
 finding his own position enviable. If his consciousness is divided then it
 is no longer the old Hans Hansen. Then perhaps the reason Tonio Kroger
 does not envy himself is that he knows his position is not enviable. Except
 when secretly he thinks that it is. But at those times he knows his position to be his, and he therefore would seem to lack nothing to envy; ex-

=== p. 387 ===

cept that just then his envy of Hans Hansen is sharpest. It seems one fate
for the extraordinary (occupied it may be by the artist, or by the philosopher) is to exist in envy of the ordinary (though touched, no doubt, with
a certain contempt), and to conceive of the ordinary as without envy
(hence the idea of the bliss of the commonplace). Then is the ordinary
free of fate, except for that of living in oblivion of itself?
   (Some are bound to feel that the implication for skepticism of the
allegory or the psychology of this speculation in the name of Tonio
Kroger figures the skeptic's cause in too romantic a vein. Especially when
it is recalled that Tonio Kroger speaks early to a confidante of the "bliss
of the commonplace" as something for which the artist has a "gnawing,
surreptitious hankering", an inescapable longing "to live free from the
curse of knowledge and the torment of creation, live and praise God in
blessed mediocrity!". Later he locates this longing more fully: "I stand between two worlds. I am at home in neither, and I suffer in consequence.
You artists call me a bourgeois, and the bourgeois try to arrest me. . . .
[You] ought to realize that there is a way of being an artist that goes so
deep and is so much a matter of origins and destinies that no longing seems
to it sweeter and more worth knowing than longing after the bliss of the
commonplace." To the objects of his longing he directs the unvoiced remark: "It was always you I worked for." Tonio Kroger's remark is necessarily private from those to whom it is addressed since, as Mann's narrator
puts it, ". . . their speech was not his speech". But I recall also that Tonio
Kroger speaks of life — his life, life removed from life — "as the eternal
antinomy of mind and art", and I ask: Do we take seriously Hume's noting
of skeptical doubt as a "malady which can never radically be cured"?; and
do we accept as internal to his philosophy his praise of nature in curing
him of his "philosophical melancholy and delirium" either "by relaxing
this bent of mind, or by some avocation, and lively impression of my
senses", so that he can follow other philosophers in the practice, or necessary distraction, "upon leaving their closets" [i.e., private chambers;
studies], of "[mingling] with the rest of mankind in those exploded opinions"?; and do we think him to be asking sincerely, asking his readers to ask
themselves, whether it follows that "I must strive against the current of
nature, which leads me to indolence and pleasure; that I must seclude myself, in some measure, from the commerce and society of men, which is so
agreeable; and that I must torture my brain with subtilities and sophistries, at the very time that I cannot satisfy myself concerning the reasonableness of so painful an application . . . ? To what end can it serve
either for the service of mankind, or for my own private interest?" (Trea-

=== p. 388 ===

tise, Book I, Part IV, Sections II and VII)? No doubt David Hume is capable of greater irony than Tonio Kroger is. But hardly greater than
Thomas Mann is.)
    So saying that I cannot just not know myself amounts to saying that I
am the one who is fated to have, or to begin with, an average knowledge
of myself. And doesn't this amount to saying that I am the one who is
fated to keep myself in a certain (average) ignorance of myself? What is
the form of this ignorance, an ignorance of something I cannot just not
know? Is it to be thought of as keeping a secret? But in what form can I
keep a secret from myself, keep silent? To keep silent around myself I
have to silence myself; I keep myself in the dark by darkening myself. Presumably I would not come to treat myself as dark unless others had
treated me so. And presumably they would not have treated me so unless
they so treat themselves. — But isn't "being dark to oneself", like "someone else's being opaque to oneself", nothing but a picture? — If being
blind to oneself or to others is nothing but a picture. The aspect to which
I am blind is dark to me. The figure of which it is an aspect is opaque to
me. (If I can darken myself, can I enlighten myself? The news of those
conversant with the subject seems to be that I cannot. If I give over darkening myself the result will be my enlightenment.)
    But can't I just not know myself, the way I can just not know you? I
can just not know something about myself, for example that I have a
 heart murmur or that I have just crossed the Swiss border and hence am
 free. But would it make sense to say that I had not made my acquaintance,
 just never crossed my path? Or since I must somehow have been introduced to myself, is the issue rather to be thought of as how well acquainted I am with myself? But what counts as getting better acquainted?
 Sense here depends upon what one takes the issue of "knowing a self",
 one's own or another's, to be. I can fail to recognize myself under a particular description, e.g., as "the inheritor of a criminal's fortune", or as
 one "of no woman born", or as one "of mixed blood". And how are these
 failures different from failing to recognize myself as one "with a heart
 murmur"? One might say that the former failures amount to failures to
 know who or what I am. But how can it be that one among the endless
  true descriptions of me represents the truth of me, tells who or what I
 am? How can there be a key to my identity?
     Tragedy and comedy are all but filled with this possibility — that one
  among the endless true descriptions of me tells who I am. That is to say,
 this possibility is what all but fills tragedy and comedy, which are therefore so often about the learning of a name, or learning the equation of

=== p. 389 ===

two names. The not knowing the equation, and then the learning, precipitates catastrophes or diversions of catastrophe. The drama turns upon
whether the assimilation will come in time. The obvious scene for the
learning is the moment of recognition. Since the recognition is of a person
in whom the protagonist is implicated (otherwise we are dealing not with
tragedy or comedy but with melodrama or farce) the recognition of the
other takes the form of an acknowledgment of oneself, one's own identity.
This need not be a case, as with Oedipus, in which the hero had before
the learning not been cognizant of his identity. It can be a case, as with
Antigone, in which everything is known but in which the logic of recognition (viz., that it demands acknowledgment) is itself the drama. Here the
 tragedy is that the cost of claiming one's identity may claim one's life. In
another tragedy, say Phedre, acknowledgment is forbidden from a different source of law: here everything is known to one, and acknowledgment is forbidden to that one.

    In Must We. Mean What We Say?, I continued an essay on the problem
of other minds ("Knowing and Acknowledging") with a reading of a tragedy ("The Avoidance of Love"). I did not see the implications of that
juxtaposition at once; I do not know that I see them now. But finding the
juxtaposition, I hoped it would prompt two main lines of comparison and
investigation: along the fact that both skepticism and tragedy conclude
with the condition of human separation, with a discovering that I am I;
and the fact that the alternative to my acknowledgment of the other is
not my ignorance of him but my avoidance of him, call it my denial of
him. Acknowledgment is to be studied, is what is studied, in the avoid-ances that tragedy studies. To arrive at an explicit and usable formulation
of these relations is now a conscious goal of this writing. It can have no
conclusion otherwise.
    That I cannot just not know myself can be put this way: "I am I" does
not convey a piece of information. — Of course not. It is a tautology,
hence empty. — But for some the knowledge of this tautology, of this
 emptiness if you like, is ecstasy. (I call attention once again to The Senses
of Walden, pp. 100-104.) ~ Then there must be such a thing as an
 ecstasy of boredom. — But perhaps you find this because you do not believe the tautology, I mean do not really find that it is a tautology, but
 instead take it as my answer to the question, "Who am I?". But "I am I"
is not that answer. That answer is, or might be, "No one". It serves to reject, or explain, this answer to respond, "I am I". (In Being and Time,

=== p. 390 ===

Heidegger's words for the structures of Dasein's existence, words he calls
existentiale, he characterizes as empty. I dare say that this is his understanding of Nietzsche's having made Zarathustra, as its subtitle says, a
book for all and none, i.e., for the no one anyone may be.) That I am I
thus says that I am not even me — a hilarious, or rather an ecstatic,
glimpse at the possibility that I am not exhausted by all the definitions
or descriptions the world gives of me to me. Everything that happens to
me is my life, the woman says at the end of Red Desert. Very well, but I
am the one who must take it upon myself. (I cannot doubt that there is
life on the red desert; call it Mars. I know some who live there.)
   A striking exception to the thought that I can stand in any relation to
myself that I can stand to others is that of belief. Why apparently can I
not, in grammar, believe myself? Is it because I cannot tell myself anything I do not already know? Can't I tell myself falsehoods? If deceiving
oneself were the same as lying (to oneself) then one might rest assured that
one had deceived oneself alone. What is believing someone and what is its
connection with believing something?
   Why is Moore's Paradox not a contradiction? That is, how does "The
sun is shining and I don't believe it" differ from "The sun is shining and
the sun is not shining"? One difference is that I can easily promote the
second from a contradiction to a paradox by taking it as a truth: for example, half of the earth is always in the dark. Here I have kept the range
of reference of each side of the contradiction from touching. I can similarly keep the hearers of Moore's Paradox from touching. If "and I don't
believe it" is said to someone other than the original hearer (say someone
in the room with you, your hand over the mouthpiece of the telephone),
then I have lied to the first hearer and implicated the second in the lie.
Why, then, not say that "The sun is shining and I don't believe it" is a lie
in which I try to implicate the same hearer? One might reject this description on the ground that it is a lie only if half of it is true, i.e., only if the
speaker is speaking the truth about not believing it. — Yes. We would
not know what we are asked to believe. — But that is equally true of the
contradiction. And it would be true if someone said, "The sun is shining
and I am lying". — Well, to believe what someone says is to believe that
he believes it. — Obviously not. I may not share his sincere beliefs.
— Well, to believe what someone says is to believe what he intends you to
believe. — Certainly not. I may know on independent grounds that what
he says is true, and I may know, as in so many other cases, that he thinks
he is lying. — Well, at the least, to believe him is to believe what he
says. —And, presumably, believe it because he says it; for if I had al-

=== p. 391 ===

ready believed what he said, then I believe what he says, but I do not believe him. But suppose I believe what is said to me only if two say it. A
appears and says "X is Y". I think: That's what you say. Then B appears
and confirms it, i.e., repeats it. Now I believe, or at any rate am prepared
to say, that X is Y. But I do not believe either A or B, any more than I
believe my weathervane when I read the wind's direction from it. This
raises the question: Why, if I accept what you say, on the basis of your
saying it, do I respond by saying "I believe you", not "I believe what you
say"? I would like to say that the home of belief lies in my relation to
others. So I am inclined to say that if I do not believe either A or B then
I do not believe what they have told me either; my relation to the proposition that X is Y is not one of belief. But it is not one of doubt either.
That is the problem: I am in no position to doubt it. Then what is the
relation to a proposition that I have characterized as my "being prepared
to say it"? Pushed by a philosophy, I accede to the idea that I believe it.
Unpushed, my relation to it is my relation to what it says, e.g., to the circumstance of the sun's shining. (In saying that the home of belief lies in my
relation to others, to what they tell me, to what I hear (or remember as
having heard; perhaps I read it), I am proposing that our access to belief is
fundamentally through the ear, not the eye. The ear requires corroboration (and prompts rumor), the eye requires construction (and prompts
theory). Perhaps there is a further way here to understand my reluctance
to speak of the skeptic as attacking (or the ordinary language philosopher
as defending) our beliefs about the world. The skeptic is assessing our constructions of the world; constructions after the fact; sorts of imagination
of it.)
   I can of course tell myself something that I have not already been told,
but the result is not that I thereupon believe it, but that I thereupon want
to believe it. (E.g., "I told myself I had done enough".) So it looks as if I
cannot give myself my word. But can't I? Can't I trust myself and make
a promise to myself? But I cannot hold myself to my promise to myself,
perhaps because I am in no position to refuse my excuses. And trusting
myself is believing in myself. Prophets do not (merely) believe in God,
but believe God, take his word. If to believe myself would be to take my
word for what I say, then speaking, asking belief from others, would be
giving my word. This is why promising is just a specialized form of giving
one's word. Rather than being looked upon as an extension of my commitments, the act of promising is better looked at as a restriction of them:
take my word only for this. If for you to believe me is for you to take my
words, i.e., believe what my words say and believe them on the basis of my

=== p. 392 ===

saying them, then what you believe is that the words are mine to say, that
I have taken them from myself. (If the case is described as your believing
that I tell what I tell because I believe it, this must not be taken as an
explanation of why I tell it, or tell anything. To explain that would be to
explain why it is from you, and why in these circumstances, that I am asking for belief.)
   Say that your believing me is your accepting my expression of myself.
(One might object to this: Your believing me is your accepting my expression of the world, e.g., my saying that the cat is on the mat. But this
leaves out my role in establishing your relation to the circumstance of the
cat's being on the mat as one of belief.) Then the reason we do not speak
of believing oneself would be that we see no call for saying that one accepts one's expression of oneself. But is there no call because it is obvious
that this must always be the case (unless I am lying, in which case it is
obvious to myself that I do not accept my expression)? For there to be
room for me to accept my expression of myself, there must be room for
me not to accept it. I do not mean that there must be room for me to
doubt the truth of what I say; room can be made. I mean that there must
 be room for me to doubt that I have said it on the basis of believing it, to
doubt that the words come from me. Can I?
    This line may seem altogether too extreme. Believing someone is not
 as epistemologically baroque as I have been painting it. I have at best
been responding to the difficulties of believing in the genuineness, or
 truthfulness, of someone's expression, in cases in which their saying something is the only, or final, basis for believing it, whether because it is something about their inner lives, say their dreams, or because it is about
 something which they alone witnessed and survived. Whereas in ordinary
 cases it is so easy to believe what another says, as easy as hearing them.
 — Why easy? Because the stakes are low? Because in ordinary cases what
 they say can always be checked? As if believing another were merely
 handier than something else, always more or less faute de mieux. (So that
 believing someone is having faith in things unseen.) — But I do not always feel that speaking to someone is making myself handy for them, or
 always done because something handier is lacking. If something were lacking, is it something the other might do or something I might do? And if
 I could not tell myself something I had not already been told, or not tell
 it anew, never take myself by surprise, come upon myself anew, I would
 be bound to bore myself colossally. I could still amuse myself, but hardly
 all the time. What I could not do would be to take an interest in myself.
 This may lead me to a particular view of the need for others.

=== p. 393 ===

   I wish to paint my conviction that I am intelligible to others, my capacity to present myself for acknowledgment, as my believing myself. In
Zarathustra, Nietzsche speaks of believing oneself as the correct or hopeful relation to one's body, having previously identified the self as the body
("Of Immaculate Perception"). "Only dare to believe yourselves — yourselves and your entrails"; as if self-knowledge were a species of divining.
It is his way of saying, contrary to Descartes, that the self is not to be
identified with the mind. (To whom is it said? To me, for example. But
hardly to my body!) It is also a way of saying that self-doubt is not overcome by any set of beliefs I may have about myself, any more than skeptical doubt about the existence of the world is overcome by any set of beliefs I may acquire about the world. "Dare to believe your body" is the
command of someone who views us as doubting our bodies, harboring a
suspicion, or fantasy, that, as I have put it, my body is not mine, not my
original. As if to say: Descartes's trick of doubting the existence of his
body came long after we had already in practice denied its existence; at
best he epitomizes an intellectual labor of millennia. And my mind is no
more mine, if no less, than my body is. (For Nietzsche, there is no key to
one's identity. Hence, after his first book, there is for him no tragedy. One
might feel that just this is our (new) tragedy. For it means that there is
no ending, only return, eternally.) Skepticism and solutions to skepticism
consequently make their way in the world mostly as lessons in hypocrisy:
providing solutions one does not believe to problems one has not felt.

   But isn't the question raised by skepticism (about other minds) why it
is that we attach such extreme importance to the human guise, I mean
form? Have we discovered that it is worth it, that there is some return for
us in this attachment? Have we discovered that only in these locales can
the human soul be found?
   The argument from analogy — I mean not for the existence of God but
for the existence of other (other) minds — seems to contain such thoughts.
In arguing from the premiss that I know my body to be connected with
sentience to the conclusion that other bodies are connected with sentience,
I must pass through a line that says in effect: "The other's body is like
mine". There seems no end to the trouble one can make for this line. One
might say: The other's body is like mine in many respects; but the only
respect that would count is if, like mine, it were connected with sentience.
So the question is begged. — But only if the argument is meant to be a
priori. It is, however, as in the case of the analogous argument for God's

=== p. 394 ===

existence from the fact of Design in the world, surely meant to be a
posteriori.
   The line does not suggest, or not say, that some particular other's body
is like mine, say that it is of the same type, say pyknic. It suggests that all
other (human) bodies are like mine. Unlike the argument from Design,
in which the analogy between the world and a machine is very weak — as
if what one really needs is an argument to Design here — the analogy with
respect to other minds is too good. For in what revelant respect might
another human body not be "like" mine? Well, it might not have sentience associated with it. But if it might not, then nothing (else) about its
likeness to mine can in the least rule out that possibility. — But the argument from analogy is not meant to rule out the possibility altogether. It is
merely to get the possibility left open. — But this is nothing yet, in particular it is not intellectual caution. Because to grant that the other body
might not, however improbably, have sentience associated with it is to
rely on our having the power or the understanding to grant that absence.
 Would it be, for example, the power or the understanding to grant that
some particular other might be a machine? Who, for example?
    If I become convinced that Mr. So-and-so is a machine, my conviction
will not be expressed by the idea that he lacks something, or that he is
 not connected with something that I am connected with. I want to express
 the conviction that the human race lacks this member, or rather that the
 human population turns out to be one less than I had counted on. How
 could I strike his name off the list? — It was widely known, in my college
 days, that a dog whose name I have forgotten was almost granted the
 baccalaureate degree by Berkeley. The degree was held up in his final
 semester when it came to light that the members of the fraternity that he
 had adopted had for almost four years been enrolling him in courses and
 writing his examinations. I do not know whether, when this came to light,
 those members were expelled from the University, but I cannot believe
 that the dog was expelled. He was doubtless stricken from the rolls; the
 population of the University was one less than the registrars had counted
 on. What was the registrars' error? Was it to have assumed, surmised,
 imagined, believed, presupposed, or what not, that the names on their
 rolls correlated, at best, with human beings? (What would be the proper
 term of criticism for this error? Inattentiveness? Intellectual laxness? Lack
 of conscientiousness?) — The epistemological profit of this case lies not
 in imagining their error but in imagining their surprise.
    — But the human body is awfully like a machine. — So really an argument from analogy, like the argument from Design, ought to have been

=== p. 395 ===

directed toward calling our attention to the likenesses between the body
and a machine? Such an argument would, I should guess, be as likely to
convince us as the one from Design. (Historically the perception of the
world as a machine and the perception of the human body as a machine
seem to have come at roughly the same time.) And certainly it would be
a better line of argument, or less empty, to say that the body is like a
machine than that my body is like some unspecified other body. It is as
if the wrong party to the dispute about minds or souls got hold of the
argument from analogy first.
   A traditional objection to the argument from Design concerned its
anthropomorphism: it yields at best a God who is too like a man. (Not
that it is clear what the objection is to this. There is after all biblical
testimony for a kind of similarity between God and man.) Oughtn't there
similarly be an objection to the argument from analogy concerning its
narcissism? Call the argument autological: it yields at best a mind too like
mine. It leaves out the otherness of the other. — That is unfair to the
argument. All it says is that the other is like me in the respect of being
sentient. — You might as well say the argument from Design makes God
like a human being only in the respect of being finite.
   Then where does the idea come from that another's body, any other's,
is like mine? One could be forced to this idea to avoid saying that our
bodies are the same, i.e., human. — Avoid saying this? As if anyone had
ever wished to say it! — It is true that I am appealing here to an experience of being struck by the uniformity of all human bodies. There is the
companion experience, perhaps more common, o£ being struck by their
differences from one another. In my experience this is usually prompted
by a surprise that the human face has so few distinctive features, hence
that tiny variations among just these features are what make it possible
to distinguish one from a multitude. Whether I am struck by likeness or
difference, however, the basis of the surprise is the stability of the human
frame, as it were, under countless inflections — the internal relation between each body and each other.

   Animals other than humans have bodies more or less like the human
body, homologous with it. Why do I think that if there are human souls
the human body is the only fitting locale for them?
   I do not wish to deny that the frog body is the best picture of the frog
soul. Nor do I wish to deny that I can think this frog is a Prince — if, that
is, I can think that a Prince has suffered enchantment, or anyway meta-

=== p. 396 ===

morphosis. What am I thinking? Not merely that he has been given a
frog's body, fitted into one as it were. He is a frog — anyway he lives as a
frog, says what frogs say, loves what frogs love. He has been changed into
something else. Has he the soul of a frog? I might say he has the consciousness of a frog, though he has the self-consciousness of a Prince. Bu
there are limits. No magic can change a frog into a Prince — a frog, that
is, who had never been a Prince. He can be given a Prince's shape, that is
all. He has the self-consciousness of a frog. Then the frog in him will, I
imagine, keep trying to get out. There will be moments of embarrassment
when he needs to speak, or when suddenly he tucks his legs under himself
and leaps from the throne. But these moments can be covered over, either
with royal explanations or with judicious applications to the court of
mass hallucination or blindness — trivial magic by comparison. — I say
 they are both frogs, the charmed one on the pad in the pond for all the
world a frog, and the charmed one on the throne in the hall for all the
court a Prince. I also say there is a difference. But how shall I respond to
 this difference, how express my knowledge of it? If I care for both of
 them, I feed both of them flies. In each case I might, or might not, put
 the fly on a golden plate and lay it before its recipient with deference,
 perhaps at the table, perhaps on the ground. Others may from time to
 time not understand, or not appreciate, my behavior. Neither from time
 to time may I. Or rather, I may not understand my convictions, since they
 are expressed in what seem incompatible ways.
    What really goes into caring for them, beyond the willingness to do
 them some service? Which of them could one love? One might have an
 erotic attachment to the one on the throne, but not, if one is normal, to
 the one on the pad. To which of them might I direct agape, my love not
 for him but for the humanity in him? — But where is this humanity? I
 cannot settle upon it. I might weep the fortunes of the Prince, and as I do
 a tear may fall upon the one in the pond. But is it for him, the one in
 the pond, that I am cast down? He may be all right, he may be content.
  If the Prince were otherwise intact but thought he was a frog then I might
 weep for him even though he was content. — But if I cannot settle upon
  saying of either the Prince who is a frog or the frog who is a Prince that he
 is a human being, I am also not content to say that I regard either of
  them as a human being. What would be the point of saying this, beyond
 expressing my caring about them? But I care about things other than
  human beings — animals, trees, statues. And I do not regard these as human beings. Though that might depend upon who I am. —Whoever
  you are you cannot care about these things the way you care about human

=== p. 397 ===

beings. — But suppose I do not care about human beings. Must I? — If
you do not then you can express care only where there is no mutuality.
— But suppose I find greater mutuality, anyway sympathy, with a chipmunk. You may find that incredible. But I would like to ask you to
consider the individual case.
   In failing to settle upon the humanity of the charmed frogs, I perhaps
failed to make life sufficiently difficult for myself. I avoided sufficiently
individualizing either the one in the pond or the one in the court. If the
one in the pond had been, say, the Princess my sister, and responds to me
in ways that strike me as her ways — a certain tilt of the head when she
rebuked my boorishness, a certain petulance in the way she sometimes
turned from me, a certain stillness when she listened to music — then I
might feel I had a secret, whose responsibility I could evade only at my
peril. But what is my secret? That my sister is no longer a human being?
And does this mean that my sister, in particular, is now a frog? Is anything
any longer my sister? Where, for example, is she? If my sister, when intact,
had been inside her body, then why am I so reluctant to say that she is
inside the frog's body? If, on the other hand, my sister had been identical
with her body, then why do I have any special attachment to this frog
at all, whom I have just recently met?
   And do these questions trace our genuine alternatives, that either I am
inside my body or else I am my body? They seem made for our indecision
about whether to say that a sensation, for example, is obviously either
private or not private. They also suggest that the problem of others may
not be fundamentally epistemological but fundamentally metaphysical.
How can we know whether we know there are others until we know what
we want to know, what there is to know? But how is this different in the
case of the problem of the existence of the world? Are we no longer interested in that question because science is not interested in it in the way we
were? Then would the establishment of a science of mind answer that
question, or talk us out of it? (What is our interest in science?)
   In the meantime, to get at our idea of the human being we will have to
go through our ideas of the intactness of the human being, hence through
our ideas of the losses of intactness, the ways in which a soul and a body
can be lost to one another, in which my experience cannot move freely
to the one through the other. We should not make life easy for ourselves
here, because we are to test not merely the limits of our identity but the
limits of our humanity. Being human is the power to grant being human.
Something about flesh and blood elicits this grant from us, and something about flesh and blood can also repel it. How far can we maintain

=== p. 398 ===

fellow-feeling, let alone love, in the face of a failure of intactness, of a
deformation of the body or of the psyche? But perhaps such questions
only test the degree of our saintliness. And is that necessary in order to
test the degree of our humanity? Apparently, if humanity has degrees.
   The idea we have of the human being is not, I assume, likely to be
captured by a definition which specifies a genus. If we say that the
human being is the rational animal, we have yet to specify the connection.
(The philosophical usefulness of the genus homo is limited by the fact that
all its species, with one exception, are extinct. If we had the others for
comparison we might see what difference sapience makes and not wonder
about the connection it must have with the body.) If mind-body dualism
is true, then a preestablished harmony between them is easier to believe
than a connection. It does not help enough for Descartes to say that the
soul is not in the body as a pilot is in a ship, because he is left with the
idea that there is some place in which they connect. — Right. The connection is closer than the image of a pilot suggests; more pervasive.
— But closeness is not the issue. I expect that the relation between the
stone and the statue is pervasive, but they are not close to one another,
 they do not touch at every place, or at any place. The smile is not close
 to the face. I would rather say that the statue is the epiphenomenon of
 the (worked) stone. But why "worked"? Why not say that the statue just
 is the stone? Because that is partial, or prejudicial; it suggests that any
 stone can be seen or treated as a statue. This entails a particular view of
 art and of experience. — Is Wittgenstein subject to this partialness, when
 he says that "My attitude towards him is my attitude towards a soul"? My
 attitude is a state of just this organism; it is a passage of just my history;
 a passage I might find myself in, or take, at any time, regardless of the
 circumstances. Suppose the attitude noted as "towards a soul" is one I
 find myself in, or take, towards a stone. Let my attitude be what it may,
 it cannot turn a stone into a human being. The lamp illuminates hands
 and gems indifferently. Say that the gem does something special with the
 light; it nevertheless does nothing to the lamp. —This proves merely
 that the lamp has no attitudes. The statue is not in the stone (except on a
 certain myth of the sculptor); the statue is not on the stone (except in the
 case of intaglio). The statue is stone.
    I am not this piece of flesh (though perhaps Falstaff was his); I am not
 in this flesh (though perhaps Christ was in his, but then his body was
 also bread); nor am I my flesh and blood (though somebody else is); nor
 am I of my flesh (though I hope somebody is). I am flesh.

=== p. 399 ===

   Kant, if I understand, in the Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals,
reverses the Aristotelian field and thus redirects the problem of connection. He regards the human being as a species of the genus of rational
beings, to wit, the species that has the distinction of being animal, i.e.,
being embodied: the human being is the animal rational. Hence the human being is no longer the highest among creatures but the lowest among
hosts. The direction to the human is not animation but incarnation. (The
former sets Frankenstein's limitation; the latter Pygmalion's. Pygmalion
overcame his limitation through desire and prayer; Frankenstein through
craft and theft.) This results from, and serves, Kant's purpose, which is
not to explain the fact of our freedom but to show the possibility of it,
i.e., to vindicate our inescapable conviction of it; one might say: our
attitude toward ourselves and others as possessing it. Being human is
aspiring to being human. Since it is not aspiring to being the only human,
it is an aspiration on behalf of others as well. Then we might say that
being human is aspiring to being seen as human. This is a possible interpretation of Frankenstein and of Pygmalion. Their shared limitation is
then that they could accept being seen only by their own creation. This
still sounds as if their aspiration was to be God. But how is this aspiration
different from that toward the human? The confusion seems inherent in
the reception of Christianity. The message of the words of Christ, that we
share a common nature, that we are flesh, seems consistently overshadowed
by the message of the fact of Christ, that only a God, or the son of God,
could bear being human.
    Kant's image of the animal rational, demanding of itself the acknowledgment of others (Kant thinks of it as respect), and aspiring to be worthy
of it in return, never knowing whether it is truly embodied, in oneself
or others, is his continuation of the ancient interpretation of human
separateness as a message of human incompleteness. What will complete
the human work is, however, not one other but only all others. So to have
an idea of the human being is to have an ideal of the human being; and
for Kant this ideal entails, and is entailed by, an ideal of the human
community. According to this ideal, love must not absorb respect and
respect does not require love. Genuine love and genuine respect will both
know this.
   In asking whether there is such a thing as soul-blindness, I do not
mean to insist that there are such things as souls, nor that anybody believes there are. But I do, I expect, mean to insist that we may sincerely
and sanely not know whether we believe in such a thing, as we may not

=== p. 400 ===

4OO               SKEPTICISM AND THE PROBLEM OF OTHERS

know whether we believe in God, or in idols. I assume further that one
may believe, or protest, that there are souls and yet not know that there
are human beings; for that knowledge would require believing that there
are embodied souls, something incarnate. And I assume that some people
may not believe, or not know, that there are human beings. It may seem
that you could believe that the human body is the best picture of the
human soul and yet deny that anything corresponds to the picture. My
intuition is that this is false, that not to believe there is such a thing as the
human soul is not to know what the human body is, what it is of, heir to.
    Call the belief in the soul psychism. Then a serious psychology must
take the risk of apsychism. It can no more tolerate the idea of another
(little) man inside, in here, than a serious theology can tolerate the idea
of another (large) man outside, up there. Nor of small or large anythings,
call them spirits. What would these be but points or stretches of etherealized matter, without doubt unverifiable? And idolatrous besides. The
spirit of the wind is neither smaller nor larger than the wind; and to say
it is in the wind is simply to say that it exists only where there is a wind.
 If I say the spirit of the wind is the wind, I wish to be understood as
telling you something not about a spirit but about the wind. (I claim to
 know nothing about spirits that you do not know.) On that understanding, then: The spirit of the body is the body. — Wittgenstein takes the
 risk of apsychism, the risk that his understanding of the human body (as,
 for example, a picture) is unnecessary, or insincere, or dead. If this is
 behaviorism in disguise then a statue is a stone in disguise.
    Suppose what you think is that the soul does not exist. Your problem
 may be to discover how to get rid of it. First you must discover what
 happened to it. Nietzsche's travails can be said to be directed to such a
  task. In asking what happened to God, Nietzsche turns over large amounts
 of fairly unacceptable material. One had hoped that for the achievement
  of sanity a little madness would go far enough. But Nietzsche persists in
  turning up such an image of God as that of a riddled, bloody corpse
  whose open wounds we attempt to fill, i.e., deny, with knots of religion,
 which is to say, with fragments of Christian suffering, especially guilt
  (Zarathustra, "On Priests"). (Our via negativa begins with the infliction
  of those holes, or lacks, our tributes of unlikeness from ourselves; and ends
  with the filling of those holes so as to deny their presence.) The path of
  the soul in this biography is no longer upward; but since it cannot but
  aspire, it aspires downward. The soul and the body no longer fit. You
  might say that the soul has become disembodied, loose; but of course
  loose inside. It is a spirit, and not mine. For it to get outside I must be

=== p. 401 ===

exorcised. You cannot see it, but you can hardly avoid noticing its effects.
You can readily infer it. — I think I know persons for whom such issues
really do not exist; pre-Christians as it were. But I know of almost no
one who has recovered from them.
   How could it happen that a statue and its stone no longer fit? You may
ruin the statue by altering the stone slightly; you may not ruin the statue
by altering the stone greatly. You cannot ruin the stone, except for certain
purposes; you can also improve it for certain purposes. (Using it for a
statue is not improving it.) If you destroy the stone, say pulverize it, you
destroy the statue. You might just erase the statue, which was itself the
erasing of the stone. You cannot hack a limb from a stone, except figuratively, or anthropomorphically; and if you hack something from a statue
you may or may not produce a different statue. A statue in fragments —
i.e., without intactness — may be poignant, but not horrifying. A statue
may not (no longer) fit the place it is in. This compromises its intactness,
imposes a false presence or animation upon it. But not everyone is to be
expected to sense this. Surrealism depends upon a vigorous, even bourgeois, sense of appropriateness. This sense may be quite absent, as it
were a thing of the past. At least one person in our culture rich enough
to have at his disposal a museum's number of statues has them placed
about his golf course. A wilderness of monies.
    The statue has aspects. By walking around it, by the changing light, in
your changing mood, the figure can be seen as vulnerable, as indomitable,
 as in repose, as if in readiness. A doll has occasions. I am thinking of a
rag doll. It can be happy or sad, fed or punished. In repose it has aspects,
for example it can be seen as sleeping or dead or sun-bathing. But only
if you do not know which is true. — There is only one who knows which
is true, the one whose doll it is. And that one cannot strictly be said to
know it at all, except as a joke, or perhaps as a fiction. — Why not? Because he cannot be in doubt about his doll's (inner) state? Of course he
can be in doubt. He might take her to a psychiatrist. You might think
 he could not be in doubt, or be mistaken, because anything he says about
 the doll must be true. But he might be lying about the doll's mood,
 either to test the genuineness of my interest, or to deprive me of a relationship with the doll. — No, but the point is that anything he knows
 about the doll must be true, whether he says what he knows or not, and
whether he knows what he knows by observation or not. — But isn't that
 merely what it means to know? And the question remains whether he
 knows, or at all times must know.
    There are criteria in terms of which I settle judgments about the

=== p. 402 ===

4O2               SKEPTICISM AND THE PROBLEM OF OTHERS

(other's) doll. To know whether a concept applies I have to look — at the
doll. I have to determine whether I can see it in this way, get that occasion
for it to dawn for me. Otherwise I am only humoring the one whose doll
it is. Perhaps I am tired, or have a headache; I cannot in any case experience the meaning of the words about the doll. The doll seems rags. I
still know what a doll is; but at the moment I am doll-blind. Generally,
if I care, I will have to justify my concept by continuing the doll's history:
"I don't think she's really hungry. She got into the cookie jar earlier. See
how sneaky she looks." I may scatter some crumbs on her dress to prove
it, if there is something at hand I can use for crumbs. If I say "See. Now
she's comfortable", something must have changed, or I must have done
something, put a pillow under her head, or rearranged her so that she is
no longer sitting on her foot. If the other, the one whose doll it is, tells
me that she likes sitting on her foot — say because it makes her sit taller —
and puts her back in her former attitude, then perhaps that is the end of
this matter. At some point my say comes to an end. I defer to the one
whose doll it is. If I do not, what then? Perhaps the doll becomes our
scapegoat; cursed, and cast out.
    When I defer to the one whose doll it is, do I defer to his greater power?
Power to do what? I respect his relationship to the doll, its being his. This
need not be a matter of recognizing his ownership of it. (I recognize his
ownership by, for example, not taking the doll from him, not without due
process.) I recognize his authority over the doll, his having the last word
over it; hence I hold him responsible for it. The most this demands is that
 the doll be (regarded as) his to play with, for a while, in a particular place.
Even if he owns it, his authority is not unlimited; there are still rules in
 this house. Whether it is better for him to own a doll, to have it for always
rather than for a specified while, or until he decides to give it up, or
whether it is better for him or for anyone to own anything for always, are
empirical questions, or ought to be. (We seem to give children an idea
that someone owns their bodies. How, otherwise, shall we explain their
having the extraordinary idea of feeling guilty for hurting themselves,
even when the game they were playing was not, apparently, forbidden;
guilty even for becoming ill? It would then strike them as a declaration
of their freedom to say that they own their own bodies. But this would
merely be an escape from one conceptual cell; or from a dungeon into an
enclosed yard. Some are told that their body is a temple. That seems to
rule out ownership, except perhaps by a congregation. But it is otherwise
a dangerously open idea, especially concerning the conditions for admission.)

=== p. 403 ===

  Do I respect the doll? I may respect its feelings, lay it comfortably in a
nice box before storing it for another generation. But it has no say, for
example, about whether it is comfortable. It has no voice in its own history. It exists in limbo. — What is the doll? (I would like to answer that
question because I feel I know absolutely everything there is to know
about dolls. But I would like not to have to answer it since of course I
know absolutely nothing about dolls that others do not know. So there is
nothing to tell. But there may yet be something to say.) The doll is certainly not the form of the rags. Which form would it be? And if I say that
the doll is the life of the rags, that must also be a remark about us, those
of us who have a voice in its history. For me to be part of its life, I have
to enter into its history, achieve the spirit in which concepts of life are
applied to it.

    Do I know more about dolls and statues than I know about human
beings? That would be extraordinary, since after all I am a human being.
Or perhaps not so extraordinary; dolls and statues are human products,
so a human being could know everything that has gone into them. Nothing can look, feel, be broken and perhaps be mended like a doll that is
not a doll. Nothing can look, feel, be broken and perhaps be restored like
a statue that is not a statue. But presumably there can be something, or
something can be imagined, that looks, feels, be broken and perhaps
healed like a human being that is nevertheless not a human being. What
are we imagining? It seems that we are back to the idea that something
humanoid or anthropomorphic lacks something; that one could have all
the characteristics of a human being save one.
   What would fit this idea? How about a perfected automaton? They have
been improved to such an extent that on more than one occasion their
craftsman has had to force me to look inside one of them to convince me
that it was not a real human being. — Am I imagining anything? If so,
why this way? Why did I have to be forced? What did I see when I looked
inside? (How) did that convince me?
   Go back to a stage before perfection. I am strolling in the craftsman's
garden with him and his friend. He is in his usual white laboratory coat,
his friend is wearing gloves and a hat with its brim so low it almost covers
his eyes. To make a long story short, the craftsman finally says, with no
little air of pride: "We're making more progress than you think. Take
my friend here. He's one." The craftsman offers his friend a seat on one of
the wroughtiron benches and bids him relax. He leans back, crosses his

=== p. 404 ===

legs, accepts a proffered cigarette with thanks. Then the craftsman raises
his friend's left trouser leg and gives the leg a tap. It is undeniably metal.
But so what? Then he asks his friend to remove his gloves. The hands
turn out to be leathery or rubbery or something, anyway pretty obviously
not real hands. But so what? So the friend has a metal leg and two prosthetic hands, and this is a terrible way to treat him; it is obscene; a striptease of misery. I do not wish to draw it out in much more detail. — It is
clear enough that we may arrive at a conclusion that convinces me the
friend is an automaton. The craftsman knocks the friend's hat off to reveal
a manikin's head (with, as a joke, a couple of glass buttons for eyes)
which he rotates through 360 degrees; he rips open the friend's shirt to
reveal a chest of hammered brass which, prompted by the craftsman's
prying knife inserted into an all but invisible seam running straight down
from the pit of the arm, snaps off to reveal something like clockwork.
    It is less clear, but still clear enough, that we may not arrive at a convincing conclusion. As the years go on, I am invited for a walk with the
craftsman and his friends in their garden whenever there is a new development. The routine is always the same. I have seen the leg and the hands
get progressively more lifelike until I almost no longer marvel at them.
Today is special however; I can tell from the craftsman's nervous gestures
and the suppressed eagerness of his voice that there has been some new
breakthrough. . . . The brass chest snaps off and, to my horror, I see no
clockwork, but, for all the world, the insides of a human being. Recoiled,
aghast, I can hardly attend to the craftsman's delighted words: "Of course,
it's far from perfect, and most of it is superficial fakery, especially the
 bones. The digestive and circulatory systems are not bad, but we have to
do more work on the blood, which doesn't congeal in the normal temperature range. The immediate problem with the nervous system has to
do with the relative response rates of the fibre systems. That is crudely
 put, of course. It's really a problem of their interaction. As matters stand,
 the pain-responses are too — how shall I say? — on and off. Don't you
 agree?" (He demonstrates by prodding the friend's left hand. The response
 is quick but definitely mechanical.) "We could simulate better responses,
 by, for example, making the limbs slightly more sluggish. But the genuine
 issue is how to get the pain itself so that it gets better prepared and fades
 better."
    I can hardly look, and when I look I hardly know what to look at, or
 look for. As a matter of fact, I throw an anxious glance at the manikin
 face, expecting — I'm not sure. But it is reassuringly rigid, its crude eyes
 reassuringly glazed. I confess the thought does occur to me that I should

=== p. 405 ===

check that head; or not so much the thought as the impulse occurs to see
whether the head might not be just a shell, and inside it —what? A real
head, or the insides of a real head, or stuff that looks like the real insides?
The impulse fades as my trust reasserts itself. And I feel not a little
foolish. What would it prove to look inside when I have already looked
inside? — Am I foolish not to ask the craftsman what he means by "the
pain itself"? But I took myself to understand him well enough. He meant,
roughly, everything that happens between cause and effect, I mean between what went in from outside and what comes out from inside. Well,
he may want to be more sophisticated than that and call the pain itself
just what happens at the change of direction, the point of transfer between going in and coming out. I might have objected to this as follows:
"There cannot be anything happening between a cause and its effect."
Presumably I do not want to conclude that therefore there is nothing that
is the pain. Then I must conclude that there is something wrong with this
picture of causation. If there are "points of transfer", they must occur at
each point. And a stimulus cannot set up a causal network. This must be
in effect all the time. So what pain is is a change in the rate of transfer, or
a change in the rate of change of direction. But if so, then that must be a
way of representing all psychological phenomena. They must form a system. — But why am I thinking of this in relation to the craftsman? Have
his activities put him in any better position for investigating these matters than I am in? I am more interested in learning whether he really
wanted my agreement about the pain-responses.
   Time passes. One day the craftsman is quite beside himself with suppressed excitement. He insists that I pay special attention to each of our
procedures. The leg and the hands are by now really astonishing. The
movement of the legs crossing and of the cigarette being lit are simply
amazing. I want to see it all again. And as for the voice, I would bet anything that no one could tell. So far I'm dazzled. Then the craftsman
knocks off the hat to reveal what is for all the world a human head, intact.
He rotates it through about 45 degrees and then stops himself with an
embarrassed smile. The head turns back to its original position, but now
its eyes turn toward mine. Then the knife is produced. As it approaches
the friend's side, he suddenly leaps up, as if threatened, and starts grappling with the craftsman. They both grunt, and they are yelling. The
friend is producing these words: "No more. It hurts. It hurts too much.
I'm sick of being a human guinea pig, I mean a guinea pig human."
   Do I intervene? On whose behalf? Let us stipulate that the friend is not
a ringer, not someone drawn into these encounters from outside. — It is

=== p. 406 ===

important to ask whether we can stipulate this. If we cannot, then it
seems that the whole thing must simply be a science or a fairy tale. But
if it were taken as science or fairy tale then we would not have to stipulate
this. It would be accepted without question. — But only if it were a
successful story. There are rules about these things. Suppose I had told
my story leaving myself out and ending it with the friend yelling his
words. Then I would have composed a primitive science fable whose
moral has been drawn from a thousand better places: We are Franken-steins whose creations are meddlings with nature and will one day rise
against us. No serious publication would take the story, but it is a complete one. If, however, I tell it as I have, with myself in it, and I add the
question, "Do I intervene?", then the story is not complete. If I stop there,
a sensible reader will be contemptuous at my incompetence; I do not
 know the rules. I have not given enough evidence to know whether, for
example, the friend is a ringer, nor to make the sheer speculation an
 interesting one.
    Let us try to complete it in such a way that the craftsman is shown to
 know that the friend is not a ringer. Then the friend is who, or what, the
 craftsman knows him to be. What does the craftsman know? Suppose,
 satisfied with the degree of my alarm, and my indecision about whether
 to intervene, the craftsman raises his arm and the friend thereupon ceases
 struggling, moves back to the bench, sits, crosses his legs, takes out a
 cigarette, lights and smokes it with evident pleasure, and is otherwise
 expressionless. (I may be having a little trouble with the rules of the fiction here. Could a being, for example a fictional being, evidence pleasure
 and be otherwise expressionless? How about otherwise impassive? That
 is prejudicial. A thing cannot be impassive unless that thing can have
 passions. Perhaps I should just omit "with evident pleasure".) The craftsman is happy: "We — I mean I — had you going, eh? Now you realize that
  the struggling — I mean the movements — and the words — I mean the
 vocables — of revolt were all built in. He is — I mean it is — meant — I
 mean designed — to do all that. Come, look here." He raises the knife
 again and moves toward the friend.
     Do I intervene? That is, do I go on with the story? I can imagine only
 one interesting continuation (without adding more characters). It is one
  in which my interest shifts from the friend to the craftsman. I turn on
  him: "You fool! You've built in too much! You've built in the passions
  as well as the movements and the vocables of revolt! You've given this
artificial body a real soul." (That is, a soul; there are no artificial souls —

=== p. 407 ===

none, anyway, that are not real souls.) Then the end may consist in our
realization that this had to be.
    Or it may go on with our investigating why it had to be. But then our
problem is a conceptual one, and we will have to start telling one another
new stories, or vying with one another for our pictures of the passions. In
any case, I have learned that if something humanoid differs in some respect from a human being — that it has all the characteristics of a human
being save one — that respect will not be something going on just inside,
or just outside. This is why my interest shifts away from the friend. I can
learn no more from him, anyway, no more about him by looking inside
him. I know what I will see if I look.
    Isn't this just an assumption, a particular interpretation of the story?
Maybe the imitation insides, in the former story, were just virtuosity for
the sake of virtuosity. They have been cleaned up in the new model.
There is nothing there but acceptable strata and zones of silk-like and
sponge-like substances and golden spun wire thinner than spider's threads.
This is what the craftsman knows and he just wants to show me where the
micro-computers and energy sources are placed. — Then I will insist that
he show me this by using X-rays or diagrams, not a knife. — So then you
are interested, after all, in what is going on inside him. — But not in
order to settle whether the friend is a human being. This could be settled
by stipulating that if I am shown a micro-computer or energy source
 inside then I am to conclude that he is not one. But this is arbitrary. Why
stop there? A human being could contain such devices. Why go that far?
 If the ideas of silk and sponge and wire have not convinced me, why would
any of these further accompaniments? — But if looking inside might not
 settle the question whether the friend is a human being, why isn't this
more interesting than ever, or, if you like, more amazing than ever? And
 doesn't this at least suggest that we cannot know that another is sentient?
— It may suggest what state someone is in who takes it this way.
    For it is not I, at this stage of the story, who refuses to press for a
settlement; it is the teller of the story, with me in it, who refuses to see
 that the story is incomplete. If I, in the story, am unsettled about the
humanity or automatonity of the friend, it is only my subservience to the
 craftsman's view that would prompt me to look inside. Whatever doubts
I have about the friend's insides I equally have, or should be permitted
 to have, about his outsides as well. Why, for example, does he have just five
 fingers on each hand; and why hands; and why toes instead of rollers;
 and why not eyes in the back of his head; and why, if it is, is his "sense"

