=== chunk: williamson-2018-doing-philosophy/ch10-model-building ===
title: Model-Building
source_pdf: docs/sources/williamson-2018-doing-philosophy/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 138-151
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 127
plan_page_end: 140
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 127 ===

                               
                Model-Building

                      Models in Science
Many natural scientists aim at a distinctive kind of progress which
philosophers are starting to recognize as an appropriate aim for
them too.
   The stereotype of scientific progress is discovering a new law of
nature. Such laws are meant to be universal generalizations about
the natural world, holding without exception for all times and
places, by some sort of necessity: nice, if you can find one.
However, most natural and social science studies messy complex
systems—cells, animals, planets, galaxies, families, organizations,
societies—which are hard to characterize by universal laws. What
laws must hold for all tigers, for example? “All tigers are striped”
won’t do, because there are albino tigers. “All tigers are four-legged” won’t do either, because there are three-legged tigers,
and so on. “All tigers are animals” is true, but doesn’t get us far.
Although tigers obey the fundamental laws of physics, like everything else in nature, that won’t console a biologist who wants to

=== p. 128 ===

 Model-Building

say something specific about living things as contrasted with
elementary particles and stars. If we keep watering down our
initial attempts, we may eventually reach something exception-less, but the danger is that it will be too weak and uninformative
to be of much interest. This isn’t just a problem about animals.
Complex systems of all shapes and sizes tend to be messy and
unruly.
   To manage the problem, scientists have revised their objectives.
Instead of seeking universal laws about complex systems, they
build simplified models of them. Occasionally these are physical
models: water running through a sand tray to model a river
eroding its banks, a construction of coloured rods and balls to
model a DNA molecule. More typically, the models are abstract,
defined by mathematical equations which describe how a hypothetical system changes over time. The hypothetical system is
vastly simpler than the real-life systems of interest, but still has a
few of their key features. The strategy is to analyse the behaviour
of the hypothetical system mathematically, in the hope that it will
simulate some puzzling aspects of the real-life systems’ behav-iour, and thereby cast light on them.
   For example, you might wonder why a population of
predators—say, foxes—and a population of prey—say,
rabbits—keep oscillating, though rises and falls in one do not
coincide with rises and falls in the other. A key point is that,
holding other things equal, the more foxes there are, the more
rabbits get eaten, but the more rabbits there are, the more fox
cubs survive. One can write down differential equations that
express the rate of increase or decrease of each population in
terms of the current number of predators and prey. They are

=== p. 129 ===

                                                Model-Building 

known as the Lotka-Volterra model. In most ways, it grossly oversimplifies: it ignores changes in the vegetation the rabbits feed on,
changes in the tendency of humans to hunt foxes and rabbits,
variations amongst foxes, variations amongst rabbits, and so on.
Since such factors make a difference, the equations are not universal laws. Indeed, they couldn’t be, since for mathematical
reasons the change in population is treated as continuous, even
though in real life it changes in whole numbers: when one of 
rabbits dies, the number goes straight down to , with no
intermediate time when the number of living rabbits was ..
Nevertheless, despite all these oversimplifications, the model correctly predicts some general structural features of population
change in predator–prey species. Much progress in natural science is now of this kind. Once we have a successful model, we can
try building a little more real-life complexity back into it, step by
step, but the models will always be vastly simpler than real life
itself—otherwise they would be too complex to analyse.
    Sometimes there is no workable alternative to model-building.
For example, biologists ask why two-sex reproduction is the norm
for animals, since reproduction by three sexes or none is possible
in principle. If you want to understand why a phenomenon doesn’t
occur, you can’t go out and observe and measure it. Instead, a good
strategy is to build hypothetical models of the phenomenon to see
how it goes ‘wrong’. You might study a model where both two-sex
reproduction and three-sex or no-sex reproduction occur, to see
which does better, perhaps in achieving genetic variation within
the species, which enables it to adapt evolutionarily to changes in
the environment. Such models aim not to predict observed quantities but to explain an absence.

=== p. 130 ===

 Model-Building

                     Models in Philosophy
Humans are a classic example of messy complex systems. In one
way or another, much—though not all—of philosophy is about
humans. Thus moral and political philosophy mainly concern a
good human life and a good human society. Philosophy of science concerns human science; philosophy of art concerns human
art; philosophy of language concerns human language. Though
philosophy of mind pays some attention to non-human animal
minds, its main focus is on human minds, and in any case nonhuman animals are messy complex systems too. Though in principle epistemology concerns all knowledge, in practice it mainly
concerns human knowledge. Logic and metaphysics are partial
exceptions, since they tend to deal with matters so basic that
messy complexity is less relevant, and informative, precise, ex-ceptionless laws can be formulated. For the rest, however, one
might expect a model-building strategy to be appropriate.
   That is not how most philosophers have seen it. Many still aim
at exceptionless universal laws, even about messy complex
systems—humans—for whom natural scientists have mainly
abandoned that ambition. In that respect, philosophers have
done their field a disservice by inadvertently setting it up for
failure, making it search for something that isn’t there. People
who contrast progress in natural science with deadlock in philosophy often do so on the basis of a false image of each side.
Failing to appreciate how much scientific progress consists in
building better models, they fail to ask how much philosophical
progress consists in building better models too.
   We have already seen an example of progressive model-building in philosophy: epistemic logic advances in just that

=== p. 131 ===

                                                Model-Building 

way (Chapter ). Its models are not universal laws; they involve
grossly unrealistic simplifications. Nevertheless, they cast light on
human knowledge in the manner of a scientific model.
    When philosophers work with probabilities, they typically use
models, without emphasizing the fact. For instance, epistemologists often use a lottery as a simple model of uncertainty. To make
things definite, suppose that exactly , tickets have been sold,
numbered in order; there’s just one winner, chosen at random.
Thus if you have one ticket, its probability of losing is /,.
When chance is in play like this, how probable should a statement be for you to believe it? You might decide that requiring
 per cent certainty is an unreasonably high standard,
and resolve to believe whatever has a probability of at least
 per cent. Immediately, you have a problem. By your rule, you
believe that the winning ticket number is at least  (since that is
 per cent probable), and you believe that the winning number is
at most  (because that too is  per cent probable), but you
refuse to believe that the winning number is between  and 
inclusive (because that combined statement is only  per cent
probable). Thus you believe each of two statements separately,
but you refuse to put them together, to believe their conjunction.
It’s like accepting “He’s British” and “He’s a criminal” but refusing
to accept “He’s a British criminal” (about the same person).
A politician who did that in a TV debate could be made to look
very stupid by opponents, at least with voters who cared about
consistency. You might think that  per cent was a bad choice of
threshold for belief, and choose a different threshold instead, for
instance  per cent, corresponding to the rule, “Believe what is at
least  per cent probable”. But a little calculation shows that the

=== p. 132 ===

 Model-Building

only thresholds for belief which avoid all such lottery problems
are  per cent and  per cent. Since a threshold of  per cent
means believing every statement whatsoever—total credulity—
you are forced back to a threshold of  per cent, the standard of
certainty you already rejected as unreasonably demanding. Thus
even such a ‘toy’ model can illustrate the difficulties of basing
belief on probabilities.
   If you think about the lottery model, you can quickly identify
some of its simplifying assumptions. For instance, it assumes that
you know exactly how many tickets have been sold. In practice,
the organization running the lottery may not announce or even
know how many tickets have been sold; even if they announce a
number, you may give a non-zero probability to the hypothesis
that they are mistaken or lying. Then you may also give a nonzero probability to the winning number being , (since more
than , tickets may have been sold), and you may give a higher
probability to the winning number being  than to its being ,
(since fewer than , tickets may have been sold). But taking
account of all those realistic complications is not time well spent.
Thinking about the simple model goes more quickly to the heart
of the problem. When more complex probabilistic models are
needed to understand more intricate problems, mathematically
minded epistemologists construct them too.
   In philosophy of language, model-building goes back at least to
Carnap. To understand what he was up to, we first need some
background in semantics, the theory of meaning.
   A striking feature of human languages is that once you master a
few words and grammatical constructions, you can use them to
build a potential infinity of meaningful sentences, for instance

=== p. 133 ===

                                                  Model-Building 

“Picasso slept”, “Picasso’s aunt slept”, “Picasso’s aunt’s aunt slept”,
and so on. You can understand them even if you have never heard
or read them before. The central project of modern semantics is to
explain how the meaning of a complex expression (like one of the
quoted sentences) is determined by the meanings of the simpler
components of which it is composed (like “Picasso”, “aunt”,
“slept”, and the possessive “s”), and how they are put together—
“Cats scratch dogs” and “Dogs scratch cats” have different meanings but the same components. Nor is the meaning of a sentence a
mere list of the meanings of its component words, since that
would make the sentence a mere list of words; such lists do not
say anything true or false, unlike sentences. For example, the
sentence “Napoleon died in ” says something false, while
“Napoleon died in ” says something true—he did die in .
Thus the meanings of words and other expressions must be able
to combine with each other, so that sentences can say something
true or false. To explain how such combining can work, one
needs a clear story about what meanings are. This whole vast
project is called compositional semantics, to which both philosophers
of language and linguists have contributed.
   Before Carnap, logicians made considerable progress in compositional semantics by treating the meaning of an expression as
its extension, its actual application out there in the world. At its
simplest, the extension of the name ‘Picasso’ is the man Picasso
himself; the extension of the noun ‘cat’ is all cats. The extension of
a sentence is simply truth or falsity, depending on whether it says
something actually true or false. Thus the extension of “Napoleon
died in ” is falsity while the extension of “Napoleon died in
” is truth. Extensional semantics, this kind of compositional

=== p. 134 ===

   Model-Building

semantics, explains how the extension of a complex linguistic
expression is determined by the extensions of the simpler expressions of which it is composed and how they are combined. The
approach turned out to work very nicely for sentences built up
using logical words such as ‘and’, ‘or’, ‘not’, ‘every’, and ‘some’,
which already enable one to build up more and more complex
sentences (see Box  for some rules of extensional semantics,
closely related to the rules for the same words in Chapter ’s
Box  on logic games).
   However, extensional semantics ran into a roadblock with
modal words, such as ‘can’ and ‘must’, or ‘possibly’ and ‘necessarily’. Compositional semantics should apply to them. For example,
the meaning of “Possibly Napoleon died in ” is composed
from the meaning of the word ‘possibly’ combined with the
meaning of the simpler sentence “Napoleon died in ”. Since
extensional semantics equates the meaning of a sentence with its
truth-value, it implies that when the meaning of ‘possibly’ combines with the truth-value of “Napoleon died in ” the result is
the truth-value of “Possibly Napoleon died in ”. The truth-value of “Napoleon died in ” is falsity, while the truth-value of
“Possibly Napoleon died in ” (understood in the relevant way)
is truth—although he didn’t die in , he could have done. Thus
extensional semantics implies: when the meaning of ‘possibly’ combines
with falsity, the result is truth. But now consider an inconsistent
sentence, like “Some dogs are not dogs”. The truth-value of
“Some dogs are not dogs” is falsity, while the truth-value of
“Possibly some dogs are not dogs” is also falsity—it couldn’t be
that some dogs are not dogs. But extensional semantics implies
that when the meaning of ‘possibly’ combines with the truth-

=== p. 135 ===

                                                   Model-Building 

value of “Some dogs are not dogs”, the result is the truth-value of
“Possibly some dogs are not dogs”, in other words: when the
meaning of ‘possibly’ combines with falsity, the result is falsity. Hence
extensional semantics makes inconsistent predictions about the
result when the meaning of ‘possibly’ combines with falsity. For
similar reasons, it makes inconsistent predictions about the result
when the meaning of ‘necessarily’ combines with truth.
    Carnap realized that extensions carry too little information for
the meanings of modal words like ‘possibly’ and ‘necessarily’ to
work on. The underlying problem is that extensional semantics
only considers extensions in the actual world, whereas modal
words are sensitive to extensions in non-actual but possible worlds
too (for Carnap’s own way of putting it, see Chapter ). To solve
the problem of developing a compositional semantics for modal
words like ‘possibly’, he equated meanings with intensions rather
than extensions. The intension of a word or sentence is the entire
spectrum of its extensions across all possible worlds, actual and
non-actual. Carnap showed how the meaning of ‘possibly’ combines with the intension of any sentence ‘A’ to give the intension
(and extension) of ‘Possibly A’, and likewise for ‘necessarily’. In
effect, he interpreted ‘possibly’ as ‘in some possible world’ and
‘necessarily’ as ‘in every possible world’. Thus, instead of an
extensional semantics, Carnap gave an intensional semantics for
modal words. He also showed how, wherever extensional semantics works well, it can easily be turned into intensional semantics
(if you want a taste of intensional semantics, see Box ).
    Carnap gave a complete intensional semantics for an artificial
formal language: every formula, however complex, has an intension, determined step by step from the intensions of the simplest

=== p. 136 ===

 B  Extensional and intensional semantics
......................................................................................
 Extensional Semantics
 Complex sentences are built up from simpler ones using ‘and’, ‘or’,
 and ‘not’. The extension of a sentence is its truth-value, either truth
 or falsity. The extension of a complex sentence is determined from
 the extensions of its component sentences by these rules (‘A’ and ‘B’
 are any sentences of the language):

    and     If ‘A’ is true and ‘B’ is true, then ‘A and B’ is true.
            If ‘A’ is false or ‘B’ is false, then ‘A and B’ is false.
    or      If ‘A’ is true or ‘B’ is true, then ‘A or B’ is true.
            If ‘A’ is false and ‘B’ is false, then ‘A or B’ is false.
    not     If ‘A’ is true, then ‘Not A’ is false.
            If ‘A’ is false, then ‘Not A’ is true.

 Intensional Semantics
 Complex sentences are built up from simpler ones using ‘and’, ‘or’,
 ‘not’, ‘necessarily’, and ‘possibly’. The intension of a sentence is its
 spectrum of truth-values over all possible worlds. The intension of a
 complex sentence is determined from the intensions of its component sentences by these rules (‘A’ and ‘B’ are any sentences of the
 language; w is any possible world):

    and   If ‘A’ is true in w and ‘B’ is true in w, then ‘A and B’ is true in w.
          If ‘A’ is false in w or ‘B’ is false in w, then ‘A and B’ is false in w.
    or    If ‘A’ is true in w or ‘B’ is true in w, then ‘A or B’ is true in w.
          If ‘A’ is false in w and ‘B’ is false in w, then ‘A or B’ is false in w.
    not If ‘A’ is true in w, then ‘Not A’ is false in w.
          If ‘A’ is false in w, then ‘Not A’ is true in w.
    necessarily If ‘A’ is true in every possible world, then ‘Necessarily A’ is true in w.
                     If ‘A’ is false in some possible world, then ‘Necessarily A’ is false in w.
    possibly         If ‘A’ is true in some possible world, then ‘Possibly
                     A’ is true in w.
                     If ‘A’ is false in every possible world, then ‘Possibly A’ is false in w.

=== p. 137 ===

                                              Model-Building 

constituents of which it is composed. It is a much more sophisticated model of meaning than extensional semantics. Through
the work of Richard Montague, Saul Kripke, David Lewis, and
many others, Carnap’s intensional semantics has massively influenced both philosophy of language and semantics as a branch of
linguistics. Although the models have become still more elaborate, they preserve the crucial move from extensions to intensions.
   Carnap worked in a more model-building spirit than his predecessors. He did not construct his formal language to do mathematics in or to reveal the hidden essence of all languages. He
constructed a simple model language to demonstrate a way for
words like ‘possibly’ and ‘necessarily’ to work. He thereby cast
light on natural languages too. As we learn ever more of the
extraordinary complexity underlying even the most ordinary
conversations, philosophers of language and linguists will have
to rely increasingly on a model-building methodology.

           Working Models, Counterexamples,
                  and Error-Fragility
Models are fun. You can play with them. That’s not just an
incidental side benefit; it’s what they are for, in both natural
science and philosophy. We learn by manipulation, playing
about: if you can’t manipulate the real thing, a good second-best
is often to manipulate a model of it. You can fiddle with this or
that component, changing it slightly to see what difference it
makes, what varies with what. That way you come to understand
more deeply how the model works. If the model is any good, you
thereby come to understand better how the real thing works too.
For instance, you can’t arbitrarily change how English works, to

=== p. 138 ===

   Model-Building

see what difference it makes, but you can arbitrarily change the
rules of an artificial language, and calculate the consequences.
   To be easily manipulated, a model should be defined in mathematically or logically precise and tractable terms. If the definition
is vague, or too complicated, its consequences are unclear: one has
to fall back on one’s prior philosophical instincts to guess how it
behaves, instead of using the model to test those instincts. By
contrast, a well-defined model allows one to calculate rigorously
how it and variations on it behave, bypassing those prior instincts,
and so to learn something unexpected. With a model-building
methodology, rigour and playfulness go naturally together.
   The rigour of model-building is not the rigour most philosophers are used to. Traditional philosophical rigour requires dismissing a claim once a counterexample to it has been given. In that
sense, most models are born refuted, because they involve false
simplifying assumptions. For instance, models in epistemic logic
typically idealize away from the logical imperfections of normal
humans. Some philosophers dismiss those models accordingly.
   In physics, models of the solar system may treat a planet as a
point mass, as if all its mass were concentrated at its centre. Of
course, physicists know that planets are not point masses and do
not behave exactly like them. Nevertheless, physicists do not
dismiss such models, for they also know that much can be learned
from them. By contrast, if one tried to write into the model a fully
accurate description of the planet, with all its craters and bumps,
the result would be too complicated to permit calculation. It takes
skill to distinguish amongst the features of a model those which
have lessons to teach us from those which are mere artefacts of
the need to keep things simple. Philosophers are having to learn
that skill.

=== p. 139 ===

                                                Model-Building   

   To many philosophers, dismissing the true counterexample
rather than the false generalization seems like a disregard for
truth. It would indeed be intellectually irresponsible to go on
believing the generalization in the face of a clear counterexample.
But that’s not the model-building attitude. One can recognize that
a generalization is both false and a key component of a model that
points us towards genuine truths.
   If counterexamples don’t refute a model, what does? Within the
model-building methodology, what displaces a model is a better
model. Part of its superiority may be that it deals more adequately
with counterexamples to the old model, but it should also reproduce in its own way the old model’s successes. A new model with
that combination of virtues may be very hard to find.
   Model-building contrasts with the methodology of conjectures
and refutations, championed by the philosopher of science Karl
Popper (–). On the crude version of his view, scientists
put forward bold conjectures, informative universal generalizations, which can be falsified but never verified. A single negative
instance, a counterexample, will falsify the generalization; no
finite number of positive instances will verify it. Scientists do
their utmost to refute it by finding such a counterexample.
Once it is refuted, they put forward another bold conjecture,
and so on.
   One problem for such a falsificationist methodology, in both
natural science and philosophy, is that it is error-fragile. In other
words, a single mistake can have disastrous consequences. For
suppose that we are testing a bold conjecture, and take ourselves
to have found a counterexample. As good falsificationists, we
dismiss the conjecture and go on to the next one. But what if
the counterexample was a mistake? We are fallible; sometimes we

=== p. 140 ===

 Model-Building

misjudge an instance or two. In that case, the original conjecture
may have been true after all. But we never return to it; we are too
busy testing new bold conjectures. Philosophers’ reliance on
counterexamples can be alarmingly close to crude falsification-ism: once a counterexample is accepted, there’s no going back on
it. By contrast, the model-building methodology is much less
error-fragile, for it gives no such decisive power to a single
judgement. Models are compared over a variety of dimensions.
    None of this means that philosophy should go over entirely to
a model-building methodology. In some areas, such as logic, we
have found many true and informative universal generalizations.
In others, good models may be too much to expect. Even where
good models are available, as in epistemology, we may do best by
using several methods. For if each independently pulls in the same
direction, that’s stronger evidence that it’s the right direction. Such
a combination of methods is more robust, unless they pull in
opposite directions.
    The potential of the model-building methodology for philosophy is only beginning to be explored. Its scope and limits should
be clearer fifty years from now.

