=== chunk: williamson-2018-doing-philosophy/ch3-disputing ===
title: Disputing
source_pdf: docs/sources/williamson-2018-doing-philosophy/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 30-45
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 19
plan_page_end: 34
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 19 ===

                                
                       Disputing

                Two Sides of an Argument
Conferences on philosophy have much in common with academic conferences on anything else. But in one way they differ.
Amongst philosophers, a lecture often matters less than what
follows—‘Q&A’, the question-and-answer period. That is when
the speaker’s arguments and conclusions are put to the test.
Questioners propose counterexamples, allege fallacies, discern
ambiguities. In response, the speaker fights for the life of their
cherished ideas. Exchanges continue, back and forth, over several
turns. The rest of the audience watches and listens keenly, as if
following a chess match, trying to work out who’s winning.
Sometimes a draw is offered with the words “It’s a stand-off”
and tacitly accepted; sometimes the chair intervenes to cut short
a stalemate. There is a code of signals to the chair: a raised hand
means a new question, a raised finger a follow-up on the current
point. A serious conference may schedule an hour for Q&A after
each talk.

=== p. 20 ===

 Disputing

   When it comes to the outcome, the chess analogy is misleading, since it suggests that, once the exchange is over, it’s always
clear who won. But the rules of argument are much less clear than
the rules of chess, and can themselves be disputed, so two sides
may disagree on the legitimacy or effect of a move. The chair is no
umpire or referee, and doesn’t rule on such matters. There may be
no consensus on who had the better of the exchange. Perceptions
can depend on prior theoretical commitments. Indeed, the
exchange may itself have been partly or wholly on the legitimacy
of moves in the lecture.
   Some philosophers are unhappy with this model of philosophical discussion as gladiatorial combat. Those who lack the confidence to step into the arena are consigned to the passive role of
mere spectators, yet self-confidence is not highly correlated with
insight. What has single combat to do with the search for truth?
There is something to such worries. When the philosophical
climate goes bad, aggressive bluster or suave sophistry can silence
careful reasoning. But to discourage sharp-edged questions only
exacerbates matters, by making it easier for high-prestige speakers
to bluff, and get away with bad arguments.
   If the emperor has no clothes, everyone should feel entitled to
say so. I once heard a lecture by a well-known scholar of the
philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche (–), urging that
Nietzsche’s philosophy is not mere academic theorizing; if taken
seriously, it transforms one’s life into something radically different
and unconventional. In Q&A, an undergraduate asked him how
come in that case he was a professor of philosophy delivering an
academic lecture in the conventional way to a student philosophy
society. The Nietzsche scholar was huffily dismissive: “I don’t see

=== p. 21 ===

                                                         Disputing 

the relevance of that question”. Everyone else in the room did. The
emperor may not enjoy being told he has no clothes, but he can
still benefit; he may even take the radical step of getting some. As
for the Nietzsche scholar, twenty years on he remains a professor
of philosophy in the same respectable department, regularly publishing academic volumes on his usual themes.
    Admittedly, I gave a very partial view of philosophical discussion. I presented it as a zero-sum game, where one party’s gain
always equals the other party’s loss. Many exchanges in Q&A are
straightforwardly cooperative. Audience members may suggest
additional evidence for the speaker’s idea, or new applications of
it, or ways to generalize it, or modifications of it in the spirit of the
speaker’s aims, or ways to simplify a supporting argument. The
threat of an objection does not always lurk behind a request for
clarification.
    Nevertheless, the phenomenon of two sides arguing against
each other is too central to philosophical practice to be dismissed
as misbehaviour. Moreover, it is connected with the starting point
of philosophy. For how is one to discover the limitations of one’s
common sense, and get beyond them? A natural answer is: by
meeting someone whose common sense is in conflict with one’s
own. By arguing with each other, both sides have the opportunity
to test the strengths and weaknesses of their starting points.
    In politics, it is sometimes wise to brush disagreements under
the carpet, since the alternative may be disunity or even violence.
Intellectual inquiry does not flourish under those conditions. It
requires relevant disagreements to be got out into the open, not
muffled up. I have occasionally experienced philosophical cultures in which hard criticism was frowned on. They were deeply

=== p. 22 ===

 Disputing

hierarchical: those lower down the hierarchy were not supposed
to question those higher up. It is an ideal habitat for error.
   A feel-good slogan is that discussion should be constructive,
not destructive. It sounds like a platitude, but imagine telling city
planners that they should always build houses and never knock
them down. What happens when space is in short supply and
filling up with bad housing? In philosophy, good and bad ideas
compete for attention, which is also in limited supply. Of course,
the slogan that discussion should be destructive, not constructive,
would be far worse, but we need to get beyond such simplistic
slogans if we are to understand better what kinds of discussion
will help us most to answer philosophical questions correctly.

                   Adversarial Philosophy
A useful comparison is with the adversarial system for settling
legal disputes. Each side has an advocate, to argue its case as
strongly and effectively as possible. In a criminal trial, there is
the prosecution and the defence. This is one widespread format
for getting at the truth in cases of disagreement. The idea is to
ensure that each side gets a fair hearing. For that to work properly,
each side must be competently represented, by someone willing
and able to find and present the favourable evidence and arguments. The system has obvious disadvantages, for instance when
one side is more competently represented than the other. But it
also has advantages over the system of the single investigating
magistrate. For even the fairest of magistrates is still human, and
may reach premature conclusions, become demotivated from

=== p. 23 ===

                                                     Disputing 

pursuing alternative lines of inquiry, and so miss the truth. The
adversarial system is well designed to provide adequate motivation
for each side of the argument. Similar considerations apply to
philosophical disputes. Although lawyers argue on the side that
pays them, while philosophers usually argue on the side of their
intellectual sympathies, both have strong incentives to argue well.
   Like defence and prosecution lawyers, philosophers often
argue for what others see as a lost cause. The reason is different,
though: typically, they become over-attached to their own ideas.
This is not a peculiarity of philosophers: it is a natural human
trait. With pardonable exaggeration, the great physicist Max
Planck said that truth triumphs in science not because its opponents are won over, but because they die. Such obstinacy is not all
bad; it ensures that ideas are given every chance to overcome
criticisms, rather than being abandoned prematurely. When two
senior philosophers argue some issue out with each other in
public, with prestige at stake, it is often clear that neither of
them will ever persuade the other; even so, it is not a waste of
time if there are uncommitted students in the audience, making
up their own minds as to which of the two is having the better of
the argument.
   Sometimes, even more like lawyers, philosophers argue on
behalf of an idea they do not really believe in, just because they
think it deserves to be taken seriously.
   The legal comparison reminds us that court cases, under both
adversarial and non-adversarial systems, often result in unjust
verdicts. The challenge is to find specific changes in procedure
that would make such verdicts less likely—just saying that courts

=== p. 24 ===

 Disputing

must proceed constructively would not help. Similarly, error
often triumphs over truth in philosophical debate. The challenge
is to find specific changes in procedure that would make such
results less likely. I wish I knew how to meet that challenge.
    The adversarial system requires a judge and perhaps jury to
adjudicate between the two sides, to reach a decision. In philosophy, there is less urgency about reaching a decision than in the
courts, but insofar as anything plays the role of judge and jury, it
is the wider community of philosophers. The first requirement for
it to play that role is a disposition to listen carefully to what all
parties say. The second requirement is an appreciation of the rules
of argument. I know many philosophical communities that do
well—though very far from perfectly—on both scores. Because
such virtues are prized, each generation tends to learn them from
its predecessors. Of course, they are by no means exclusive to
philosophy. Education by its nature favours and inculcates the
ability to attend carefully to what is said. Likewise, education and
experience in any academic discipline foster appreciation of the
rules of the types of argument characteristic of that discipline—
for instance, in the case of mathematics, the rules of mathematical
proof. In philosophy, interpersonal disputation plays such a large
role that philosophers unsurprisingly tend to have an unusually
sensitive appreciation of its underlying rules.
    When careful listening and appreciation of the rules of argument are widespread in a community, bullying, bluff, and sophistry are typically counterproductive, because they make the
perpetrator look stupid. There is a corresponding incentive for
those with good points to make them, because they can expect to
be listened to.

=== p. 25 ===

                                                        Disputing 

    Naturally, there is also the fear that, if you make what feels to
you like a good point, it may be found out by others to be a bad
point after all. Some level of such a fear is no bad thing, since it
comes with a capacity for self-criticism and a respect for the
intelligence of others. But too much fear is paralysing. What can
help is that philosophers experienced in listening carefully and
applying the rules of argument learn how hard philosophy is, how
easy it is for even the best philosophers to go wrong, and so are
less inclined to judge someone on the basis of one misfire.
    To say that a philosophical culture of interpersonal argumentation encourages competition instead of cooperation is like
saying that a chess club encourages competition instead of
cooperation. There’s some truth in it, but it’s a facile contrast.
Chess is a competitive game, with one player winning if and only
if the other loses, but the club itself is a cooperative venture of its
members, and even a single game of chess involves cooperation
between the players, because both want to play, for pleasure or
reputation or to improve at chess. Similarly, although there are
winners and losers in some philosophical disputes, the institution
of philosophy is a cooperative venture of philosophers, and even
a single philosophical dispute involves cooperation between the
disputants because both want to argue the point. Indeed, although
chess does not primarily aim at knowledge in the way philosophy
may primarily aim at knowledge, games of chess do in fact add to
knowledge, for instance of which positions are wins for black.
Similarly, philosophical disputes add to knowledge, at the very
least of which philosophical positions are defensible. Both philosophers in a dispute may improve their theories as a result, even if
they still disagree.

=== p. 26 ===

   Disputing

                          Logic Games
There is nothing new about the role of interpersonal dispute as a
medium for philosophy. In medieval scholastic philosophy, oral
disputations were formalized as a sort of game, obligationes, played
in Latin, with rules almost as formal as those of chess. One side
had to argue for a statement, the other side against it, in accordance with the strict rules of medieval logic, most of which are still
recognized as valid. Each side had to be explicit about which of
the other side’s premises (assumptions) they accepted, and which
they rejected. They could distinguish several senses of a premise,
accepting it in some, rejecting it in others. Someone senior would
act as umpire, to ensure that the rules were properly applied. The
spirit of the game is still recognizable to modern philosophers,
even though the details of the rules now look too restrictive,
because modern logic has identified many valid forms of reasoning irreducible to the forms studied in medieval logic.
   There are also logic games with rules more closely related
to modern logic. They typically involve two players—a defender
and an attacker—and a statement in dispute (see Box  if you want
more details). If the statement is true, the defender has a winning
strategy. If the statement is false, the attacker has a winning
strategy. Thus if both players make the best moves available to
them, the defender will win if the statement is true, and the
attacker will win if the statement is false: the outcome of the
game corresponds to the truth-value of the statement. Such
games show the naivety of a general contrast between games
and the search for truth, since their rules are designed precisely
to serve the search for truth.

=== p. 27 ===

. University masters in a disputation over the definition of happiness, with
an audience of students, from a thirteenth-century Parisian copy of a
commentary on Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics.

=== p. 28 ===

 Disputing

  B  Rules in a logic game
 ......................................................................................
  If the statement in dispute is ‘Everything is so-and-so’, the attacker
  chooses an object, gives it a name ‘N’, and the game continues with
  ‘N is so-and-so’ as the new statement in dispute (‘so-and-so’ could be
  anything, for instance ‘green’). The attacker gets to choose because it
  only takes one counterexample to falsify (show false) an ‘every’
  statement, and the attacker is the one who needs to find it.
     If the statement in dispute is ‘Something is so-and-so’, the
  defender chooses an object, gives it a name ‘N’, and the game
  continues with ‘N is so-and-so’ as the new statement in dispute.
  The defender gets to choose because it only takes one example to
  verify (show true) a ‘some’ statement, and the defender is the one
  who needs to find it.
     If the statement in dispute is ‘A and B’, the attacker either chooses
  ‘A’ or chooses ‘B’, and the game continues with the chosen one as
  the new statement in dispute (‘A’ and ‘B’ could be any statements,
  for instance ‘It’s raining’ and ‘It’s cold’). The attacker gets to choose
  because it only takes one false component to falsify an ‘and’ statement, and the attacker is the one who needs to find it.
     If the statement in dispute is ‘A or B’, the defender either chooses
  ‘A’ or chooses ‘B’, and the game continues with the chosen one as
  the new statement in dispute. The defender gets to choose because it
  only takes one true component to verify an ‘or’ statement, and the
  defender is the one who needs to find it.
     If the statement in dispute is ‘Not A’, the defender and the attacker
  swop roles and the game continues with ‘A’ as the new statement in
  dispute (for instance, if ‘A’ is ‘It’s raining’, ‘Not A’ is ‘It’s not raining’).
  The reason for the role-swopping is that the truth of ‘Not A’ is
  equivalent to the falsity of ‘A’, and the falsity of ‘Not A’ is equivalent
  to the truth of ‘A’, so the defender of ‘Not A’ should attack ‘A’ and
  the attacker of ‘Not A’ should defend ‘A’.

=== p. 29 ===

                                                         Disputing   

    Each move reduces the logical complexity of the statement in
  dispute. Sooner or later, the game reaches a point where what is in
  dispute is a logically simple statement. It is assumed that such
  statements can be verified or falsified by observation. If it is true,
  the defender wins. If it is false, the attacker wins.

   Of course, most philosophical discussion is much less formally
structured than a logic game. Nevertheless, such games provide a
good model of how, under suitable conditions, an adversarial
framework can serve the pursuit of truth.

                             Dialogues
In less formal terms, the natural written form to represent philosophical disputes and question–answer exchanges is the dialogue.
It’s also one of the oldest forms of philosophical writing. Plato’s
dialogues are still the most famous and evocative examples of the
genre. Despite that, Plato expressed disapproval of written philosophy, because one can’t engage in question-and-answer with a
book. Perhaps a written dialogue is the next best thing.
    The Greeks also tended to pose philosophical paradoxes in
question-and-answer form, where contemporary philosophers
would present the deduction of an absurdity from plausible
premises. An example is the sorites paradox, which shows the
acute difficulty of applying vague terms soundly. The Greeks
posed it as a long series of questions and answers:

  Q: Do , grains make a heap?

=== p. 30 ===

     Disputing

     Q: Do , grains make a heap?
     Q: Do , grains make a heap?

And so on, in principle, all the way down to:

     Q: Do  grains make a heap?

One gets that sinking feeling. To answer any question in the series
differently from the next seems like treating the vague word ‘heap’
as more precise than it really is. Yet it is absurd to give all
questions in the series the same answer, since the answer ‘Yes’ is
obviously right for the first question and obviously wrong for the
last one. However one answers, one looks and feels silly. By
contrast, modern philosophers formulate the paradox as a
deductive argument with two plausible-sounding premises:

     Major premise For every number n, if n+ grains make a heap
                   then n grains make a heap.
     Minor premise , grains make a heap.

They then show how to reason step by step all the way down to
the absurd:

     Conclusion      grains make a heap.

The difference may not seem large, but it brings out how much
the Greeks regarded doing philosophy as an interpersonal activity, not a solitary one.
   Plato didn’t put himself as a character into his own dialogues.
His teacher Socrates appears, originally modelled on the historical
Socrates. In the later dialogues, Plato used Socrates or another
character as more of a mouthpiece for himself, but always with

=== p. 31 ===

                                                      Disputing 

some distancing effect, so he could try out ideas without fully
committing himself to them. Other philosophers have chosen the
dialogue form to express views too dangerous for them to publicly endorse, by not officially identifying with the character
closest to their own thinking. Even in what would now be classified as natural science, Galileo wrote his Dialogue Concerning the
Two Chief World Systems () that way to distance himself from
the heretical new sun-centred astronomy of Copernicus while still
demonstrating its advantages over the traditional earth-centred
astronomy of Aristotle and Ptolemy. The subterfuge failed: he
made it too clear which side won the arguments, so the Roman
Catholic Church banned the book and imprisoned him. David
Hume did a slightly better job of concealing his subversive sympathies in Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion (), in his case
scepticism about the existence of a god. Because he was suspected
of atheism, he had been turned down for a professorship in
philosophy at Edinburgh University in favour of a far less
distinguished candidate. Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz and George
Berkeley (–) also wrote major works in dialogue form.
With views closer to religious orthodoxy, they could make it clear
which character they identified with, though the result was a loss
of dramatic tension.
   In general, the philosophical dialogue is a less pluralistic form
than it looks: it has various characters but only one author. At
worst, it is a dialogue between the ventriloquist and his puppet. In
contemporary philosophy, it plays only a minor role. Logic formulas and footnotes are ill at ease in a dialogue. Nevertheless, the
form retains significant strengths. For expository purposes, it
embodies the interaction of different points of view in a vivid,
memorable, and perspicuously structured way. A reader’s emotions

=== p. 32 ===

 Disputing

are more easily engaged by a dispute between imagined people
than a logical inconsistency between abstract theories.
   But doesn’t philosophy require a coolly rational, objective,
unemotional attitude? That’s psychologically unrealistic. Even in
science, humans perform best when strongly motivated. Burning
curiosity is an emotion. When you don’t care which of the
answers to a question is right, you won’t be alert to the subtle
logical differences between them. If you like one character and
dislike another, you scrutinize each move in their dialogue as a
potential threat or opportunity. The emotions you feel may reveal
to you the underlying philosophical instincts you had all along.
Even the less savoury emotions associated with competitiveness,
rivalry, and ambition can be harnessed to play a constructive role
in natural science and philosophy when the disciplinary culture
rewards good work over bad, valid arguments over invalid ones.
We saw how that’s possible in philosophical disputes.
   The dialogue still has uses as a medium for philosophical research. Sometimes each side regards the other’s theory as
nonsense, rather than false. Thus one can’t expound the theories
from a neutral standpoint, for expounding a theory presupposes
that it makes sense. In such cases, it’s best to let each side
speak for itself, which is in effect the dialogue form. An example
is a current dispute in philosophical logic between ‘generality
absolutists’, who say, “It makes sense to generalize about
absolutely everything whatsoever, without restrictions”, and
‘generality relativists’, who say, “However many things you
generalize about, it always makes sense to generalize about even
more”. Each side regards the other’s words as somehow self-undermining, failing to make the kind of sense they want to make.

=== p. 33 ===

                                                       Disputing   

   Short of a proper dialogue, it is very common, having presented one’s view, to give some potential objections to it with
one’s replies. It is a kind of hypothetical dialogue with the reader:
“If you are tempted to make this objection, here is my reply”. This
often helps to clarify just what the view implies, and what it does
not.
   Discussions of scepticism often focus on imaginary dialogues
with a sceptic. Contemporary epistemologists are much concerned with the vulnerability of common-sense ways of thinking
and talking to sceptical objections. They dramatize it in mini-dialogues like this:

: You don’t know much about the animals in this zoo.
: That’s not fair! I know the animal in this cage is a zebra.
: For all you know, it’s just a mule cleverly painted to look like
  a zebra. The zoo may be having financial difficulties.
: I suppose you’re right. I was wrong. I don’t know it’s a
  zebra, after all.

Mary’s next step could be to suggest that John doesn’t even
know that he’s awake, because for all he knows he’s asleep in
bed, dreaming he’s at the zoo.
   The difficulty of John’s position also shows something about
the dangers of dialogue. For what should he say, in order not to
concede Mary’s point? If he says, “Come off it! You know as well
as I do that it’s a zebra”, he will sound dogmatic and obtuse. Once
your interlocutor has introduced a possibility, there’s conversational pressure on you to take it seriously, not just dismiss it. The
sceptic ruthlessly takes advantage of such etiquette to cut
the ground away from under the non-sceptic’s feet. The culture

=== p. 34 ===

 Disputing

of philosophy supports those sceptical moves by its unusually
tolerant attitude to bizarre possibilities.
   John could reply to Mary, “Good point! But for present practical purposes, if you don’t mind, I’ll just assume I do know it’s a
zebra”. That sounds more polite and accommodating. But in
practice it will probably turn out just to be a more diplomatic
way of not taking Mary’s point seriously, as will emerge if Mary
answers, “Actually, I do mind”. If you are really unwilling to make
assumptions your conversation partners won’t grant, you hand
them terrifying power over your own thought. Sceptics will be
only too pleased to exploit that power to drag you into
the sceptical pit with them. You had best be careful whom you
talk to.

