=== chunk: williamson-2018-doing-philosophy/ch4-clarifying-terms ===
title: Clarifying Terms
source_pdf: docs/sources/williamson-2018-doing-philosophy/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 46-60
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 35
plan_page_end: 49
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 35 ===

                                
               Clarifying Terms

              It Depends on What You Mean
A mountain guide told me about a frustrating conversation
he once had with a client who quoted a temperature in degrees.
The guide asked, “Is that degrees Fahrenheit or degrees Celsius?” The
man replied, “What do you mean? A degree is a degree”. However
much the difference between the two scales was explained to him,
the man always repeated, “A degree is a degree”. He felt on safe
ground there. To him, any attempt to question that tautology
sounded like a con trick. But sometimes, to make progress, we
must clarify our terms.
  If you ask a philosopher whether you have free will, you are
unlikely to get a straight answer, “Yes” or “No”. Instead, you may
be told: “It depends what you mean by ‘free will’. If you are asking
whether your decisions cause your actions, surely they often do. If
you are asking whether they are uncaused causes of your actions,
surely not. Your decisions are caused by your beliefs and desires,
and those beliefs and desires have causes of their own, and so on.”

=== p. 36 ===

 Clarifying Terms

. C.E.M. Joad, philosopher as media celebrity, s style.

If you feel you meant something else again by ‘free will’, the
philosopher will discuss with you what that might be.
   One of the best-known figures on British radio in the mid-twentieth century was a philosophy professor, C.E.M. Joad
(–), a panellist on the popular programme The Brains

=== p. 37 ===

                                                 Clarifying Terms   

Trust. He was famous for beginning his answers to listeners’ questions with the words, “It all depends on what you mean by . . . ”. The
stereotype of the philosopher became someone who asks “What do
you mean?”, instead of “How do you know?” That is the pop version
of the trend in twentieth-century philosophy often called the
linguistic turn (see p. ).
   Many philosophers have hoped to make philosophy less disputatious by clarifying terms, and to escape from futile, deadlocked arguments. Perhaps the disputes are merely verbal. If one
person says, “The temperature is  degrees” and another replies,
“No, it’s  degrees”, they may think they are disagreeing, but if
the first speaker means degrees Celsius and the second degrees
Fahrenheit, there is underlying agreement about the temperature.
Similarly, when philosopher A says, “We have free will” and
philosopher B replies, “We have no free will”, the verbal appearance of a dispute may mask underlying agreement, if they mean
different things by ‘free will’. If we notice an ambiguity, we can
resolve it by introducing separate terms with the different meanings, perhaps ‘A-free’ for what A means and ‘B-free’ for what
B means (if we can think of nothing better). Thus both A and
B can happily say, “We have A-free will but no B-free will”, not
even appearing to disagree. Each side gets what it wants.
   If we have to decide what to mean by a word, one definition
may be more useful than another, but not more true. For instance,
in mathematics it is more convenient to define the word
‘prime’ not to apply to the number , but making the opposite
decision would not have led to false theorems, just to differently
worded ones. According to Rudolf Carnap (–), when
philosophers ask what sound like deep theoretical questions

=== p. 38 ===

 Clarifying Terms

about the nature of reality, such as “Do numbers exist?”, what is
really at stake is a practical question about which language
it would be most fruitful to speak, for scientific purposes. If
scientists use a theoretical language in which the word ‘number’
is logically analogous to the word ‘planet’, will that help their
work? Some languages can express more than others, but greater
expressive power comes with costs as well as benefits: it may
generate unmanageable complexity.
   For Ludwig Wittgenstein (–), philosophical problems
arise because our ordinary language exerts a deep pull on us
towards confusions. For example, grammar suggests a misleading
analogy between proper names—‘the River Danube’—and numerical terms—‘the number seven’—tempting us to think that
numbers are just as much objects as rivers are, only more abstract.
Then we wonder how we can think about things that are
nowhere. But further investigation reveals ways in which the
analogy between ‘seven’ and ‘Danube’ breaks down. “He interrupted seven times” makes sense; “He interrupted Danube times”
does not.
   Obviously, what interested Carnap and Wittgenstein was not
the six-letter word ‘number’ itself. Most of the issues would
survive translating it by another word in another language. That
point is often put by saying that what matters is not the word
‘number’ but the concept number. Different words can express the
same concept, or have the same meaning. For them, philosophy
asks conceptual questions, not merely verbal ones. It clarifies concepts, sorts out conceptual confusions. In the twentieth century,
many philosophers held such views. Many still do. Naturally,
those views influence how they do philosophy in practice.

=== p. 39 ===

                                               Clarifying Terms   

   Clarifying concepts: if that is philosophy’s job description, it
has something useful to do without attempting, hopelessly, to
rival science. In that picture, philosophers put concepts into good
working order, while others actually put them to work. The
picture may also seem to legitimize the armchair way of doing
philosophy, to explain why philosophers have no need to go out
and look at the world or experiment on it. For they already
possess the concepts under investigation, by their competence
in a language that expresses them; either a natural language such
as English or Mandarin, or an invented artificial notation defined
by explicit rules. It’s not like studying a foreign language from
the outside.
   In practice, hopes that this linguistic or conceptual turn would
make philosophy less disputatious have been dashed. Identifying
the unspoken rules of one’s own language turns out to be very
hard. If you have ever helped someone learn your native language,
you have probably had the experience of knowing that something
they said sounded wrong but without being able to explain to
them why—what rule they had broken. First, second, and third
guesses at the rules are typically wrong, even when made by
trained linguists. Still, they can usually do better than people
untrained in linguistics, sometimes by comparing your native
language with other languages. Although significant progress in
understanding the rules of one’s native language can be made
from the armchair, it’s not a fully adequate method. If we switch
from describing how words are currently used to saying how it
might be helpful to use them in the future, things are just as
controversial, because people disagree about what the effects
would be, and whether they would be improvements.

=== p. 40 ===

 Clarifying Terms

   An example is the recent bitter controversy about the word
‘woman’. The standard definition was biological: a woman is an
adult female human. But what about the social role of women—
their moral and legal rights to get an education, to own property,
or to vote, conventional expectations of their behaviour in sex,
marriage, child-rearing, careers, and so on? Don’t those have
something to do with the concept woman? Is what matters their
actual social role, or the role they are stereotyped as playing? If the
latter, what happens when people in one society, say Britain, speak
about women in another society, say Pakistan—is what matters
the British stereotype of women or the Pakistani stereotype of
women? And what about the currently influential idea that to be a
woman is just to be willing to apply the term ‘woman’ to oneself?
There is no easy answer to the question what concept or concepts
the word ‘woman’ now expresses. As for the future use of the
word, any proposal is explosive. For consider a biological male
who identifies as a woman: if the proposal implies that we should
call that person a ‘woman’, it will enrage many people, and if it
implies that we should not call that person a ‘woman’, it will enrage
many other people. The very idea of someone in authority telling
ordinary people how they ought to use ordinary words like
‘woman’ is controversial too. Well-meaning professors tend to
imagine linguistic reform being led by people like themselves,
but in practice a trend towards redefining terms may favour
more sinister causes—for instance, when ‘torture’ is redefined to
exclude waterboarding. Politically, people habituated to going
along with linguistic reforms are easier to manipulate.
   Still, words sometimes need clarification. That applies to all
forms of inquiry, not just to philosophy. For example, physicists

=== p. 41 ===

                                                  Clarifying Terms   

distinguish two senses of the word ‘mass’: relativistic mass
(defined in terms of total energy) and proper mass (defined in
terms of non-kinetic energy). Confusing the two would lead to
detectable errors. Similarly, historians who use the word ‘feudalism’ clarify how they understand it, because some societies in
some periods count as ‘feudal’ by one definition but not by
another. Neither physicists nor historians had to wait for philosophers to make the clarification for them. The need for it became
plain to them as their subject developed. This raises the question:
does conceptual clarification play a special role in philosophy, or
does it just play more or less the same role there as it plays in all
forms of serious inquiry?
   Detecting ambiguity may play a larger and more systematic
role in philosophy than in any other branch of inquiry, with the
possible exception of literary criticism. Philosophers are trained to
be alert to ambiguity. But so far that is a difference of degree, not
kind. For physicists or historians, resolving unclarity in ‘mass’ or
‘feudalism’ is a preliminary to their main investigation, like cleaning
a surgical knife before using it on a patient. The surprising claim is
that, for philosophers, such clarification is not a preliminary to
their main investigation but the main investigation itself. Can that
claim be true?
   The need to clarify ‘mass’ came from theoretical developments
in physics, in particular Einstein’s theory of special relativity. The
need to clarify ‘feudalism’ came from developments in history—
more detailed analyses of more societies in more periods. Where
is the need for philosophers’ clarifications supposed to come
from, if all they do is clarify? If they are just clarifying previous
philosophy, wouldn’t it be cheaper and easier to abolish

=== p. 42 ===

 Clarifying Terms

philosophy altogether? Then there would be no philosophy in
need of clarification. Even if people strayed into philosophizing
from time to time, they would not be paid for it, and taxpayers’
hard-earned money would not be wasted.
   We can never expect to make our words perfectly precise. For in
order to make one word more precise, we must use other words
that are themselves to some extent vague, and that vagueness will
infect our clarifications. Vagueness can sometimes be reduced, but
it can never be eliminated, from either language or thought.
Efforts at clarification should be concentrated where there is a
special need for it. The need may be either theoretical or practical.
There were special theoretical needs to clarify ‘mass’ and ‘feudalism’. An example of a practical need for clarification is in law.
A law simply against making a ‘big mess’ in a public place would
be unworkable, because ‘big mess’ is so vague. The standard for
counting as a ‘big mess’ would have to be made clearer (though
not perfectly clear) for the term to be used in an effective law.
Conceptual clarification cut off from such theoretical or practical
needs is pointless.
   Fans of philosophy as conceptual clarification sometimes suggest that it gives us understanding rather than knowledge. But that
is a false dichotomy. If you don’t know why the sky is blue, you
don’t understand why it is blue either. As you learn more—get
more knowledge—about how Hannibal got his elephants over
the Alps, you understand more about how he got them over. The
idea of increasing understanding without increasing knowledge is
an illusion, however tempting, in philosophy as everywhere else.
   Often under the influence of Wittgenstein, some philosophers
take themselves to be doing pure conceptual clarification,

=== p. 43 ===

                                               Clarifying Terms   

untainted by theoretical activity such as advancing hypotheses to
be confirmed or falsified by future evidence. They regard such
hypothesis-testing as characteristic of natural science, by contrast
with philosophy. Their attitude tends to result in a peculiarly
dogmatic style of philosophizing, since their conception of philosophy forbids them from properly acknowledging the possibility of clear-headed challenges to their own philosophical
arguments, and in particular of the premises from which they
start. If one thinks that one is simply clearing up confusions, one
will tend to regard whoever opposes one’s efforts as confused.
   Here is an example. Some philosophers of mathematics hold
that it studies mathematical objects, such as numbers or sets,
which are not in space or time but are just as real as anything
that is. That view is called platonism, because it resembles Plato’s
theory of abstract forms (the word is spelt with a lower-case ‘p’
because platonists don’t try to follow Plato in detail). The most
distinguished modern platonist was Kurt Gödel (–), one of
the greatest logicians of all time. Philosophers who take their job
to be diagnosing confusion often accuse platonists of confusing
the kind of meaning had by mathematical terms like ‘the number ’
or ‘the empty set’ with the kind of meaning had by terms for
ordinary objects in space and time, such as ‘the River Danube’ or
‘the empty box’, as we saw. Their diagnosis is that platonists
naively assume that since we use ‘the River Danube’ and ‘the
empty box’ to refer to objects, we must use ‘the number ’ and
‘the empty set’ to refer to objects too. Those who make that
patronizing diagnosis typically know far less logic and mathematics than the platonists whose view they are dismissing. Anyway,
the evidence does not support their diagnosis. Most platonists do

=== p. 44 ===

 Clarifying Terms

not feel forced into their view by linguistic analogies. Instead, like
Gödel, they accept platonism because they find it crucial for the
best explanation of what mathematicians are doing. Whether
platonism is true or false, it is not based on mere confusion.

                 Concepts and Conceptions
Is the concept of confusion itself confused? Does the concept of
conceptual clarification need clarifying? The underlying problem
is with the concept of a concept—or, to put it non-circularly, with
the word ‘concept’. Some of the difficulties came up with the
word ‘woman’. What does it take for two people to express the
same concept with the word ‘woman’? When as a student I first
read about the philosopher Hilary Putnam, I assumed that Hilary
Putnam was a woman—every Hilary I had met was female. When
later I discovered that Hilary Putnam was a man, did my concept
of a woman change, if only slightly? Did I mean something
different by ‘woman’? If every difference in the beliefs expressed
using a word makes a difference to its meaning, it will be very
hard for two people to mean the same by a word, or for one
person to mean the same by it for more than a short time. I know
whether there’s a biro in my pocket; you don’t know: does it
follow that we don’t mean exactly the same by ‘biro’? If we pile all
such information into concepts, we shall be unable to draw a
useful distinction between conceptual and non-conceptual questions. That would undermine the idea that what is special about
philosophy is that it asks conceptual questions.
   A distinction is sometimes drawn between concepts and conceptions. A concept is more like a dictionary definition. For example, a

=== p. 45 ===

                                               Clarifying Terms   

dictionary may define the word ‘vixen’ as ‘female fox’, so the
concept vixen just is the concept female fox (my dictionary also
gives another definition for ‘vixen’, as ‘quarrelsome woman’,
which would be another concept). By contrast, your conception
of a vixen includes all the beliefs you would express using that
word (in a given sense). Unlike the concept vixen, my conception
of a vixen includes my belief that a vixen lives under my garden
shed. Dictionaries are for concepts, encyclopaedias for conceptions. If we distinguish concepts from conceptions like this, then
conceptual questions are special, because they concern definitions. Clarifying one’s concepts is defining one’s terms.
   One advantage of distinguishing concepts from conceptions is
that it explains how knowledge can be communicated from one
person to another and preserved over time. Conceptions are
personal and fleeting, but definitions can be shared and stable.
‘Vixen’ has been defined as ‘female fox’ for many centuries and
many millions of speakers of English.
   The view of concepts as definitions also underpins the idea of
philosophy as conceptual analysis. If the concept vixen is the
concept female fox, then we can analyse the concept vixen as a
combination of the concept female with the concept fox. Of course,
philosophers have not been particularly interested in the concept
vixen, but they have hoped to find such analyses of more philosophically central concepts, like knowledge, meaning, and causation.
   However, the dictionary definition model doesn’t take us very
far. Even for colour words like ‘red’, ordinary understanding has
much less to do with a dictionary definition than with our ability
to recognize examples of red as red when we see them. Most
words are like that: who understands ‘cat’ or ‘chair’ or ‘copper’ by

=== p. 46 ===

 Clarifying Terms

knowing a definition? If you can’t recognize a cormorant by
yourself, you can still use the word ‘cormorant’ because you
are part of a community of English-speakers, some of whom are
more expert than you. As competent speakers of English, we
understand philosophically interesting words like ‘know’, ‘mean’,
and ‘cause’, but not by knowing dictionary-style definitions of
them. Philosophers’ attempts to provide such definitions have a
long track record of failure. Nevertheless, we can still recognize
the difference between knowing where your keys are and not
knowing, or between meaning by ‘bank’ the edge of a river and
meaning a financial institution, or between causing the window to
break and not doing so.
   Most concept-lovers have recognized the inadequacy of the
dictionary definition model. However, they still distinguish conceptual truths from other truths that are not conceptual, even if they
are necessary. For example, ‘Red things are coloured’ is supposed
to express a conceptual truth, because the connection has been
somehow built into our concepts red and coloured. By contrast,
in an isolated community where people can recognize whales
by sight but everyone assumes them to be merely enormous
fish, ‘Whales are mammals’ does not express a conceptual truth,
because the connection has not been built into their concepts,
even though being a mammal is in fact a necessary part of the
nature of a whale. If philosophy’s concern is with conceptual
truths, that might help explain why philosophy can be done in
an armchair.
   How can we tell whether a truth is conceptual or not? One idea
is that if a sentence expresses a conceptual truth, everyone who
understands it will accept it. For example, everyone in our

=== p. 47 ===

                                                Clarifying Terms   

community who understands ‘Red things are coloured’ agrees
with it, whereas people in the imagined community disagree
with ‘Whales are mammals’. But universal assent is too high a
standard to help concept-lovers. For example, an intelligent native
speaker of English might learn the words ‘red’ and ‘coloured’ in
the usual way, but later decide that the word ‘coloured’ is so
tainted by its racist associations that it correctly applies to nothing. She refuses to call anything ‘coloured’. She no longer assents
to ‘Red things are coloured’; she instinctively rejects it, once she
has grown accustomed to her new view. But she has not lost her
understanding of the sentence; she has no difficulty in following
other speakers when they use the word ‘coloured’ in the usual
way. If there is one such dissident in the enormous community of
English-speakers, ‘Red things are coloured’ fails the test of universal assent. Similar examples can be constructed for any candidate
conceptual truth. It is unclear that any useful distinction between
conceptual and non-conceptual truths can be drawn.

                  Clarifying and Theorizing
Fortunately, the value of clarification does not depend on any
distinction between conceptual and non-conceptual matters.
Think again of mathematics, the clearest and most precise branch
of human inquiry. Mathematicians often use explicit definitions.
But if you trace their chains of definitions back, you always reach
undefined terms—their definitions don’t go round in circles or
continue to infinity. In modern mathematics, those undefined
terms typically belong to set theory, the standard framework.
The main undefined term in mathematics is ∈, the symbol for

=== p. 48 ===

 Clarifying Terms

set membership: the formula x∈y says that x (say, the number 7)
belongs to the set y (say, the set of prime numbers). There are no
standard mathematical definitions of ‘belongs’ or ‘set’. Introductory textbooks gesture vaguely towards everyday talk of collections and the like, while admitting that such analogies are
inadequate: the stamps in a stamp collection have to be collected
together in a sense irrelevant to mathematics. But this lack of
definition is no problem for mathematics. The reason is that
mathematicians have a powerful theory of sets, with axioms giving
plentiful information about what sets there are. For instance, one
axiom says that for every set there is a set whose members are the
subsets of the first set. Another axiom says that there is a set with
infinitely many members. Another says that sets with the same
members are identical, and so on. For most mathematical purposes, the theory gives mathematicians just what they need to
reason clearly and rigorously about sets. The axioms are plausible,
but have no clear claim to count as conceptual truths. It is quite
possible to understand what they say and still doubt them, though
the success of modern mathematics is good evidence in their
favour.
   Some people try to turn the axioms of set theory into a
definition of the term ‘set-theoretic structure’. The idea is that a
structure is ‘set-theoretic’ if it obeys all the axioms of set theory.
But the attempt is pointless, for in order to put such a definition to
work mathematicians would need a theory of structures, which
would look remarkably like the theory of sets in disguise. No
progress would have been made.
   As a model for philosophy, basic mathematics is far more
helpful than the dictionary. What we need for clear reasoning

=== p. 49 ===

                                                 Clarifying Terms   

are not trivial ‘truths by definition’ but a strong, explicitly articulated theory. Clarity does not aim at a mythical standard of
indubitability. Rather, its point is to make mistakes in our reasoning clearly visible, as they are in mathematics. If you hear someone deny the value of clarity, ask yourself why they might not
want mistakes in reasoning to stand out clearly.

