=== chunk: murdoch-1970-sovereignty-of-good/ch1-idea-of-perfection ===
title: The Idea of Perfection
source_pdf: docs/sources/murdoch-1970-sovereignty-of-good/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 20-63
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 1
plan_page_end: 44
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 1 ===

     THE IDEA OF PERFECTION

It is sometimes said, either irritably or with a certain satisfaction,
that philosophy makes no progress. It is certainly true, and I
think this is an abiding and not a regrettable characteristic of the
discipline, that philosophy has in a sense to keep trying to return
to the beginning: a thing which it is not at all easy to do. There is
a two-way movement in philosophy, a movement towards the
building of elaborate theories, and a move back again towards
the consideration of simple and obvious facts. McTaggart says
that time is unreal, Moore replies that he has just had his
breakfast. Both these aspects of philosophy are necessary to it.
    I wish in this discussion to attempt a movement of return, a
retracing of our steps to see how a certain position was reached.
The position in question, in current moral philosophy, is one
which seems to me unsatisfactory in two related ways, in that
it ignores certain facts and at the same time imposes a single
theory which admits of no communication with or escape into
rival theories. If it is true that philosophy has almost always done
this, it is also true that philosophers have never put up with it for

=== p. 2 ===

    very long. Instances of the facts, as I shall boldly call them, which
    interest me and which seem to have been forgotten or ‘theorized
    away’ are the fact that an unexamined life can be virtuous and
    the fact that love is a central concept in morals. Contemporary
    philosophers frequently connect consciousness with virtue, and
    although they constantly talk of freedom they rarely talk of love.
    But there must be some relation between these latter concepts,
    and it must be possible to do justice to both Socrates and the
    virtuous peasant. In such ‘musts’ as these lie the deepest springs
    and motives of philosophy. Yet if in an attempt to enlarge our
    field of vision we turn for a moment to philosophical theories
    outside our own tradition we find it very difficult to establish
    any illuminating connection.
       Professor Hampshire says, in the penultimate chapter of
    Thought and Action, that ‘it is the constructive task of a philosophy
    of mind to provide a set of terms in which ultimate judgements
    of value can be very clearly stated.’ In this understanding of it,
    philosophy of mind is the background to moral philosophy; and
    in so far as modern ethics tends to constitute a sort of Newspeak
    which makes certain values non-expressible, the reasons for this
    are to be sought in current philosophy of mind and in the fascinating power of a certain picture of the soul. One suspects that
    philosophy of mind has not in fact been performing the task,
    which Professor Hampshire recommends, of sorting and classifying fundamental moral issues; it has rather been imposing
    upon us a particular value judgment in the guise of a theory of
    human nature. Whether philosophy can ever do anything else is a
    question we shall have to consider. But in so far as modern
    philosophers profess to be analytic and neutral any failure to be
    so deserves comment. And an attempt to produce, if not a comprehensive analysis, at least a rival soul-picture which covers a
    greater or a different territory should make new places for philosophical reflection. We would like to know what, as moral
    agents, we have got to do because of logic, what we have got to

=== p. 3 ===

do because of human nature, and what we can choose to do.
Such a programme is easy to state and perhaps impossible to
carry out. But even to discover what, under these headings, we
can achieve certainly demands a much more complex and subtle
conceptual system than any which we can find readily available.
   Before going on to consider the problems in philosophy of
mind which underlie the inarticulate moments of modern ethics
I should like to say a word about G. E. Moore. Moore is as it were
the frame of the picture. A great deal has happened since he
wrote, and when we read him again it is startling to see how
many of his beliefs are philosophically unstatable now. Moore
believed that good was a supersensible reality, that it was a mysterious quality, unrepresentable and indefinable, that it was an
object of knowledge and (implicitly) that to be able to see it was
in some sense to have it. He thought of the good upon the
analogy of the beautiful; and he was, in spite of himself, a ‘naturalist’ in that he took goodness to be a real constituent of the
world. We know how severely and in what respects Moore was
corrected by his successors. Moore was quite right (it was said)
to separate the question ‘What does “good” mean?’ from the
question ‘What things are good?’ though he was wrong to
answer the second question as well as the first. He was right to
say that good was indefinable, but wrong to say that it was the
name of a quality. Good is indefinable because judgments of
value depend upon the will and choice of the individual. Moore
was wrong (his critics continue) to use the quasi-aesthetic
imagery of vision in conceiving the good. Such a view, conceiving the good on the analogy of the beautiful, would seem to
make possible a contemplative attitude on the part of the moral
agent, whereas the point about this person is that he is essentially
and inescapably an agent. The image whereby to understand morality, it is argued, is not the image of vision but the image of
movement. Goodness and beauty are not analogous but sharply
contrasting ideas. Good must be thought of, not as part of the

=== p. 4 ===

    world, but as a movable label affixed to the world; for only so can
    the agent be pictured as responsible and free. And indeed this
    truth Moore himself half apprehended when he separated the
    denotation from the connotation of ‘good’. The concept ‘good’
    is not the name of an esoteric object, it is the tool of every
    rational man. Goodness is not an object of insight or knowledge,
    it is a function of the will. Thus runs the correction of Moore;
    and let me say in anticipation that on almost every point I agree
    with Moore and not with his critics.
        The idea that ‘good’ is a function of the will stunned philosophy with its attractiveness, since it solved so many problems
    at one blow: metaphysical entities were removed, and moral
    judgments were seen to be, not weird statements, but something
    much more comprehensible, such as persuasions or commands
    or rules. The idea has its own obviousness: but it does not
    depend for its plausibility solely upon its usefulness or upon an
    appeal to our ordinary knowledge of the moral life. It coheres
    with a whole moral psychology, much of which has been elaborated more recently. I want now to examine certain aspects of
    this psychology and to trace it to what I think is its origin and
    basis in a certain argument of Wittgenstein. First I shall sketch
    ‘the man’ which this psychology presents us with, then I shall
    comment on this man’s most important features, and then I shall
    proceed to consider the radical arguments for such an image.
        I shall use for my picture of ‘the man’ of modern moral
    philosophy two works of Professor Hampshire, his book Thought
    and Action and his lecture Disposition and Memory. Hampshire’s view
    is, I think, without commanding universal agreement, fairly central and typical, and it has the great merit that it states and
    elaborates what in many modern moral philosophers is simply
    taken for granted. Hampshire suggests that we should abandon
    the image (dear to the British empiricists) of man as a detached
    observer, and should rather picture him as an object moving
    among other objects in a continual flow of intention into action.

=== p. 5 ===

Touch and movement, not vision, should supply our metaphors:
‘Touching, handling and the manipulation of things are misrepresented if we follow the analogy of vision.’ Actions are,
roughly, instances of moving things about in the public world.
Nothing counts as an act unless it is a ‘bringing about of a
recognizable change in the world’. What sorts of things can be
such recognizable changes? Here we must distinguish between
‘the things and persons that constitute the external world and
the sensations and impressions that I or anyone else may from
moment to moment enjoy’. What is ‘real’ is potentially open to
different observers. The inner or mental world is inevitably parasitic upon the outer world, it has ‘a parasitic and shadowy
nature’. The definiteness of any thought process depends upon
‘the possibility of [its] being recognized, scrutinized and identified by observers from different points of view; this possibility is
essential to any definite reality’. ‘The play of the mind, free of
any expression in audible speech or visible action is a reality, as
the play of shadows is a reality. But any description of it is
derived from the description of its natural expression in speech
and action.’ ‘The assent that takes place within the mind and in
no process of communication when no question has been actually asked and answered is a shadowy assent and a shadowy act.’
‘Thought cannot be thought, as opposed to day-dreaming or
musing, unless it is directed towards a conclusion, whether in
action or in judgement.’ Further: thought and belief are separate
from will and action. ‘We do try, in ordinary speech and
thought, to keep the distinction between thought and action as
definite as possible.’ Thought as such is not action but an introduction to action. ‘That which I do is that for which I am
responsible and which is peculiarly an expression of myself. It is
essential to thought that it takes its own forms and follows its
own paths without my intervention, that is, without the intervention of my will. I identify myself with my will. Thought,
when it is most pure, is self-directing. . . . Thought begins on its

=== p. 6 ===

    own path, governed by its universal rules, when the preliminary
    work of the will is done. No process of thought could be punctuated by acts of will, voluntary switchings of attention, and
    retain its status as a continuous process of thought.’ These are
    very important assumptions. It will follow from this that a
    ‘belief’ is not something subject to the will. ‘It seems that I
    cannot present my own belief in something as an achievement,
    because, by so presenting it, I would disqualify it as belief.’ These
    quotations are from Thought and Action, the later part of Chapter
    Two.
       In the Ernest Jones lecture, Disposition and Memory, Hampshire
    does two things: he puts the arguments of Thought and Action more
    polemically in a nutshell, and he introduces, under the protection of Freud, an idea of ‘personal verification’ which I shall
    discuss at length below. From Disposition and Memory: ‘Intention is
    the one concept that ought to be preserved free from any taint of
    the less than conscious.’ And ‘it is characteristic of mental, as
    opposed to physical, concepts that the conditions of their application can only be understood if they are analysed genetically’.
    These are succinct statements of what has already been argued in
    Thought and Action. Hampshire now gives us in addition a picture
    of ‘the ideally rational man’. This person would be ‘aware of all
    his memories as memories. . . . His wishes would be attached to
    definite possibilities in a definite future. . . . He would . . . distinguish his present situation from unconscious memories of the
    past . . . and would find his motives for action in satisfying his
    instinctual needs within the objectively observed features of the
    situation.’ This ideal man does not exist because the palimpsest
    of ‘dispositions’ is too hard to penetrate: and this is just as well
    because ideal rationality would leave us ‘without art, without
    dream or imagination, without likes or dislikes unconnected
    with instinctual needs’. In theory, though not in practice, ‘an
    interminable analysis’ could lay bare the dispositional
    machinery and make possible a perfect prediction of conduct;

=== p. 7 ===

but Hampshire emphasizes (and this is the main point of the
lecture) that such ideal knowledge would not take the form of a
scientific law but would have its basis and its verification in the
history of the individual. I shall argue later that the very persuasive image with which Hampshire has presented us contains
incompatible elements. Roughly, there is a conflict between the
‘logical’ view of the mind and the ‘historical’ view of the mind,
a conflict which exists partly because logic is still tied to an
old-fashioned conception of science. But this is to anticipate.
   I shall find it useful later to define my own view in fairly exact
section-by-section contrast with Hampshire’s; and as his view is
rich in detail, extensive quotation has been necessary. As I have
suggested, Hampshire’s man is to be found more or less
explicitly lurking behind much that is written nowadays on the
subject of moral philosophy and indeed also of politics. Hamp-shire has thoroughly explored a background which many
writers have taken for granted: and for this one is grateful. This
‘man’, one may add, is familiar to us for another reason: he is the
hero of almost every contemporary novel. Let us look at his
characteristics, noting them as yet without discussion. Hamp-shire emphasizes clarity of intention. He says ‘all problems meet
in intention’, and he utters in relation to intention the only
explicit ‘ought’ in his psychology. We ought to know what we
are doing. We should aim at total knowledge of our situation and
a clear conceptualization of all our possibilities. Thought and
intention must be directed towards definite overt issues or else
they are merely day-dream. ‘Reality’ is potentially open to different observers. What is ‘inward’, what lies in between overt
actions, is either impersonal thought, or ‘shadows’ of acts, or
else substanceless dream. Mental life is, and logically must be, a
shadow of life in public. Our personal being is the movement of
our overtly choosing will. Immense care is taken to picture the
will as isolated. It is isolated from belief, from reason, from
feeling, and is yet the essential centre of the self. ‘I identify

=== p. 8 ===

    myself with my will.’ It is separated from belief so that the
    authority of reason, which manufactures belief; may be entire
    and so that responsibility for action may be entire as well. My
    responsibility is a function of my knowledge (which tries to be
    wholly impersonal) and my will (which is wholly personal).
    Morality is a matter of thinking clearly and then proceeding to
    outward dealings with other men.
       On this view one might say that morality is assimilated to a
    visit to a shop. I enter the shop in a condition of totally responsible freedom, I objectively estimate the features of the goods,
    and I choose. The greater my objectivity and discrimination the
    larger the number of products from which I can select. (A Marx-ist critique of this conception of bourgeois capitalist morals
    would be apt enough. Should we want many goods in the shop
    or just ‘the right goods’?) Both as act and reason, shopping is
    public. Will does not bear upon reason, so the ‘inner life’ is not
    to be thought of as a moral sphere. Reason deals in neutral
    descriptions and aims at being the frequently mentioned ideal
    observer. Value terminology will be the prerogative of the will;
    but since will is pure choice, pure movement, and not thought
    or vision, will really requires only action words such as ‘good’ or
    ‘right’. It is not characteristic of the man we are describing, as he
    appears either in textbooks or in fiction, to possess an elaborate
    normative vocabulary. Modern ethics analyses ‘good’, the empty
    action word which is the correlate of the isolated will, and tends
    to ignore other value terms. Our hero aims at being a ‘realist’
    and regards sincerity as the fundamental and perhaps the only
    virtue.
       The very powerful image with which we are here presented is
    behaviourist, existentialist, and utilitarian in a sense which unites
    these three conceptions. It is behaviourist in its connection of the
    meaning and being of action with the publicly observable, it is
    existentialist in its elimination of the substantial self and its
    emphasis on the solitary omnipotent will, and it is utilitarian in

=== p. 9 ===

its assumption that morality is and can only be concerned with
public acts. It is also incidentally what may be called a democratic view, in that it suggests that morality is not an esoteric
achievement but a natural function of any normal man. This
position represents, to put it in another way, a happy and fruitful marriage of Kantian liberalism with Wittgensteinian logic
solemnized by Freud. But this also is to anticipate; what confronts us here is in fact complex and difficult to analyse. Let me
now try to sort out and classify the different questions which
need to be answered.
   I find the image of man which I have sketched above both
alien and implausible. That is, more precisely: I have simple
empirical objections (I do not think people are necessarily or
essentially ‘like that’), I have philosophical objections (I do not
find the arguments convincing), and I have moral objections (I
do not think people ought to picture themselves in this way). It is
a delicate and tricky matter to keep these kinds of objections
separate in one’s mind. Later on I shall try to present my own
rival picture. But now first of all I want to examine in more detail
the theory of the ‘inner life’ with which we have been presented.
One’s initial reaction to this theory is likely to be a strong
instinctive one: either one will be content with the emphasis on
the reality of the outer, the absence of the inner, or one will feel
(as I do) it cannot be so, something vital is missing. And if one
thinks that somehow or other ‘the inner’ is important one will
be the more zealous in criticizing the arguments concerning its
status. Such criticisms may have far-reaching results, since upon
the question of ‘what goes on inwardly’ in between moments of
overt ‘movement’ depends our view of the status of choice, the
meaning of freedom, and the whole problem of the relation of
will to reason and intellect to desire. I shall now consider what I
think is the most radical argument, the keystone, of this
existentialist-behaviourist type of moral psychology: the
argument to the effect that mental concepts must be analysed

=== p. 10 ===

     genetically and so the inner must be thought of as parasitic upon
     the outer.
        This argument is best understood as a special case of a yet
     more general and by now very familiar argument about the
     status of what is ‘private’. Our tradition of philosophy, since
     Descartes until very recently, has been obsessed by an entity
     which has had various names: the cogitatio, the sense-impression,
     the sense-datum. This entity, private to each person, was
     thought of as an appearance about which the owner had infallible
     and certain knowledge. It was taken by Descartes as the starting
     point of a famous argument, and was pictured by the British
     empiricists as an instrument of thought. The conception of the
     cogitatio or sense-datum, oddly attractive and readily grasped,
     suggests among other things that what is inward may be private
     in one of two senses, one a contingent sense and one a logical
     sense. I can tell you, or refrain from telling you, a secret; but I
     cannot (logically) show you my sense-data.
        After a long and varied history this conception has now been
     largely abandoned by philosophers. The general argument for
     abandoning it has two prongs. Briefly, the argument against the
     cogitatio is that (a) such an entity cannot form part of the structure of a public concept, (b) such an entity cannot be introspectively discovered. That is, (a) it’s no use, (b) it isn’t there.
     The latter point may be further subdivided into an empirical and
     a logical contention. The empirical contention is that there are
     very few and pretty hazy introspectabilia, and the logical contention is that there are in any case difficulties about their identification. Of the two moments in the general argument (a) has
     received more attention than (b), since as (a) has been regarded
     as knock-down (b) has been treated as subsidiary. If something
     is no use it does not matter much whether it’s there or not. I
     shall argue shortly that because something is no use it has been
     too hastily assumed that something else is not there. But let us
     first look at the argument in more detail.

=== p. 11 ===

   I said that the argument about mental concepts was a special
case of the general argument. The general argument is at its most
felicitous when applied to some simple non-mental concept
such as ‘red’. ‘Red’ cannot be the name of something private.
The structure of the concept is its public structure, which is
established by coinciding procedures in public situations. How
much success we can have in establishing any given public structure will be an empirical question. The alleged inner thing can
neither be known (Descartes) nor used (the British empiricists).
Hume was wrong to worry about the missing shade of blue, not
because a man could or couldn’t picture it, or that we could or
couldn’t be persuaded that he had, but because the inner picture
is necessarily irrelevant and the possession of the concept is a
public skill. What matters is whether I stop at the traffic lights,
and not my colour imagery or absence of it. I identify what my
senses show me by means of the public schemata which I have
learned, and in no other way can this be known by me, since
knowledge involves the rigidity supplied by a public test.
Wittgenstein in the Untersuchungen sums the situation up as follows: ‘If we construe the grammar of the expression of sensation on the model of “object and name”, the object drops
out of consideration as irrelevant.’
   This argument, which bears down relentlessly upon the case
of ‘red’, might seem to be even more relentless in the case of the
very much more shadowy inner entities which might be supposed to be the ‘objects’ of which mental concepts are ‘names’.
After all, one might say to oneself in a quasi-nonsensical way,
my sensation of red does, when I am doing philosophy, look like
something which I have privately ‘got’; and if I am not allowed
to ‘keep’ even this clear little thing as my own private datum,
why should I expect to ‘keep’ the hopelessly hazy inner
phenomena connected with concepts such as ‘decision’ and
‘desire’? Surely I should in the latter cases be even happier to rely
upon the ‘outer’ face of the concept, since the inner one is so

=== p. 12 ===

     vague. Let me clarify this so as to make plain the force of the
     genetic argument in the case of mental concepts.
        Wittgenstein of course discusses in this context mental as well
     as physical concepts. But his discussion is marked by a peculiar
     reticence. He does not make any moral or psychological generalizations. He limits himself to observing that a mental concept
     verb used in the first person is not a report about something
     private, since in the absence of any checking procedure it makes
     no sense to speak of oneself being either right or mistaken.
     Wittgenstein is not claiming that inner data are ‘incommunicable’, nor that anything special about human personality follows
     from their ‘absence’, he is merely saying that no sense can be
     attached to the idea of an ‘inner object’. There are no ‘private
     ostensive definitions’. Whether Wittgenstein is right to say that
     we can attach no sense to the idea of being mistaken about how
     things seem, and whether any legitimate conclusions about
     human nature can be drawn from his position I shall consider
     later. I want now to go on to look at the conclusions which have
     (not by him) been drawn, and at the developed form of the
     argument as we find it, with variations, in Hampshire, Hare,
     Ayer, Ryle and others.
        As I have said, the argument seems to bear even more strongly
     in proportion as the alleged inner datum becomes more obviously shadowy and even tends to be irresponsibly absent. In such
     cases purely empirical considerations (the empirical subdivision
     of (b) above) are especially strong. I say, ‘Well, I must decide. All
     right. I’ll go.’ Perhaps nothing introspectible occurs at all? And
     even if it does that is not the decision. Here we see what is meant
     by speaking of a genetical analysis. How do I learn the concept
     of decision? By watching someone who says ‘I have decided’
     and who then acts. How else could I learn it? And with that
     I learn the essence of the matter. I do not ‘move on’ from
     a behaviouristic concept to a mental one. (Since ordinary
     language, which ‘misleadingly’ connects the mental with the

=== p. 13 ===

inner, straight-forwardly connects the physical with the outer,
a genetic analysis of physical concepts would not be especially
revealing.) A decision does not turn out to be, when more
carefully considered, an introspectible movement. The concept
has no further inner structure; it is its outer structure. Take an
even clearer example. How do I distinguish anger from jealousy?
Certainly not by discriminating between two kinds of private
mental data. Consider how I learned ‘anger’ and ‘jealousy’. What
identifies the emotion is the presence not of a particular private
object, but of some typical outward behaviour pattern. This will
also imply, be it noted, that we can be mistaken in the names
which we give to our own mental states.
   This is the point at which people may begin to protest and cry
out and say that something has been taken from them. Surely
there is such a thing as deciding and not acting? Surely there are
private decisions? Surely there are lots and lots of objects, more or
less easily identified, in orbit as it were in inner space? It is not,
as the argument would seem to imply, silent and dark within.
Philosophers will reply coolly to these protests. Of course a sense
can be attached to: he decided to but did not. That is, he said he
would go, and we had reasons to believe that he would, but a
brick fell on his head. Or, the notion of his going cohered with
many other things he was doing and saying, and yet he did not
go. But all this is just as overt, just as little private, as the actual
carrying out of the decision. And it must be admitted to be,
when one reflects, difficult to attach sense by any other method
to the idea of an unfulfilled decision, in our own case just as
much as in the case of someone else. Are there ‘private’
decisions? I said some words to myself. But did I really
decide? To answer that question I examine the context of my
announcement rather than its private core.
   However, it will be said, surely there are introspectible objects
which we can identify? We do have images, talk to ourselves, etc.
Does the genetic argument imply that these are nothing? Well, it

=== p. 14 ===

     might be answered, let us look at them. One might roughly
     divide these data in order of shadowiness into visual images,
     verbal thoughts, other images, other thoughts and feelings
     which while not exactly verbal or visual seem nevertheless to be
     ‘entities’. It will be true of all these that I cannot show them to
     other people. Of course I can to a limited extent describe them, I
     can describe my imagery or mention words which ‘say’ in my
     head. I can also give metaphorical descriptions of my states of
     mind. (Ryle discusses these ‘chronicles’ and ‘histories’ of
     thought in Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume 1952). But what
     does this amount to? These data, vaguer and more infrequent
     than one might unreflectively suppose, cannot claim to be ‘the
     thing itself’ of which my uttered thoughts are the report. Note
     that I offer my descriptions in ordinary public words whose
     meaning is subject to ordinary public rules. Inner words ‘mean’
     in the same way as outer words; and I can only ‘know’ my
     imagery because I know the public things which it is ‘of ’.
     Public concepts are in this obvious sense sovereign over private
     objects; I can only ‘identify’ the inner, even for my own benefit, via my knowledge of the outer. But in any case there is no
     check upon the accuracy of such descriptions, and as Wittgen-stein says, ‘What is this ceremony for?’ Who, except possibly
     empirical psychologists, is interested in alleged reports of what
     is purely inward? And psychologists themselves now have grave
     doubts about the value of such ‘evidence’ from introspection.
     Whether I am really thinking about so-and-so or deciding suchand-such or feeling angry or jealous or pleased will be properly determined, and can only be determined, by the overt
     context, however sketchy and embryonic. That I decided to do
     X will be true if I said sincerely that I was going to and did it,
     even if nothing introspectible occurred at all. And equally
     something introspectible might occur, but if the outward
     context is entirely lacking the something cannot be called a
     decision. As Wittgenstein puts it, ‘a wheel that can be turned

=== p. 15 ===

though nothing else moves with it is not part of the
mechanism’.
   These radical arguments are, it seems to me, perfectly sound
over a certain range. They really do clearly and definitively solve
certain problems which have beset British empiricism. By destroying the misleading image of the infallible inner eye they
make possible a much improved solution of, for instance, problems about perception and about universals. A great deal that
was, in Hume and Berkeley, repugnant to common sense can
now be cleared away. But, as I have said, while Wittgenstein
remains sphinx-like in the background, others have hastened to
draw further and more dubious moral and psychological conclusions. Wittgenstein has created a void into which neo-Kantianism, existentialism, utilitarianism have made haste to
enter. And notice how plausibly the arguments, their prestige
enhanced from undoubted success in other fields, seem to support, indeed to impose, the image of personality which I have
sketched above. As the ‘inner life’ is hazy, largely absent, and any
way ‘not part of the mechanism’, it turns out to be logically
impossible to take up an idle contemplative attitude to the good.
Morality must be action since mental concepts can only be ana-lysed genetically. Metaphors of movement and not vision seem
obviously appropriate. Morality, with the full support of logic,
abhors the private. Salvation by works is a conceptual necessity.
What I am doing or being is not something private and personal,
but is imposed upon me in the sense of being identifiable only
via public concepts and objective observers. Self-knowledge is
something which shows overtly. Reasons are public reasons,
rules are public rules. Reason and rule represent a sort of
impersonal tyranny in relation to which however the personal
will represents perfect freedom. The machinery is relentless, but
until the moment of choice the agent is outside the machinery.
Morality resides at the point of action. What I am ‘objectively’ is
not under my control; logic and observers decide that. What I

=== p. 16 ===

     am ‘subjectively’ is a foot-loose, solitary, substanceless will.
     Personality dwindles to a point of pure will.
        Now it is not at all easy to mount an attack upon this heavily
     fortified position; and, as I say, temperament will play its part in
     determining whether or not we want to attack or whether we are
     content. I am not content. Let me start cautiously to suggest an
     alternative view, taking however for a rubric the warning words
     of Wittgenstein: ‘Being unable—when we surrender ourselves
     to philosophical thought—to help saying such-and-such; being
     irresistibly inclined to say it—does not mean being forced into
     an assumption, or having an immediate perception or knowledge
     of a state of affairs.’
        For purposes of the rest of this discussion it will be useful to
     have an example before us: some object which we can all more
     or less see, and to which we can from time to time refer. All sorts
     of different things would do for this example, and I was at first
     tempted to take a case of ritual for instance a religious ritual
     wherein the inner consent appears to be the real act. Ritual: an
     outer framework which both occasions and identifies an inner
     event. It can be argued that I make a promise by uttering the
     words ‘I promise’: a performative utterance. But do I, in a
     religious context, repent by sincerely uttering the words ‘I
     repent’, am I ‘heartily sorry’ simply by saying in an appropriate
     situation that I am heartily sorry? Is this so even if I then
     amend my life? This is not so clear and is indeed a difficult and
     interesting question. I decided however not to take a religious
     example, which might be felt to raise special difficulties, but to
     take something more ordinary and everyday. So here is the
     example.
        A mother, whom I shall call M, feels hostility to her daughterin-law, whom I shall call D. M finds D quite a good-hearted girl,
     but while not exactly common yet certainly unpolished and
     lacking in dignity and refinement. D is inclined to be pert
     and familiar, insufficiently ceremonious, brusque, sometimes

=== p. 17 ===

positively rude, always tiresomely juvenile. M does not like D’s
accent or the way D dresses. M feels that her son has married
beneath him. Let us assume for purposes of the example that the
mother, who is a very ‘correct’ person, behaves beautifully to the
girl throughout, not allowing her real opinion to appear in any
way. We might underline this aspect of the example by supposing that the young couple have emigrated or that D is now dead:
the point being to ensure that whatever is in question as happening
happens entirely in M’s mind.
   Thus much for M’s first thoughts about D. Time passes, and it
could be that M settles down with a hardened sense of grievance
and a fixed picture of D, imprisoned (if I may use a question-begging word) by the cliché: my poor son has married a silly
vulgar girl. However, the M of the example is an intelligent and
well-intentioned person, capable of self-criticism, capable of giving careful and just attention to an object which confronts her. M
tells herself: ‘I am old-fashioned and conventional. I may be
prejudiced and narrow-minded. I may be snobbish. I am certainly jealous. Let me look again.’ Here I assume that M observes
D or at least reflects deliberately about D, until gradually her
vision of D alters. If we take D to be now absent or dead this can
make it clear that the change is not in D’s behaviour but in M’s
mind. D is discovered to be not vulgar but refreshingly simple,
not undignified but spontaneous, not noisy but gay, not tiresomely juvenile but delightfully youthful, and so on. And as I
say, ex hypothesi, M’s outward behaviour, beautiful from the start,
in no way alters.
   I used above words such as ‘just’ and ‘intelligent’ which
implied a favourable value judgment on M’s activity: and I want
in fact to imagine a case where one would feel approval of M’s
change of view. But of course in real life, and this is of interest, it
might be very hard to decide whether what M was doing was
proper or not, and opinions might differ. M might be moved by
various motives: a sense of justice, attempted love for D, love for

=== p. 18 ===

     her son, or simply reluctance to think of him as unfortunate or
     mistaken. Some people might say ‘she deludes herself ’ while
     others would say she was moved by love or justice. I am picturing a case where I would find the latter description appropriate.
        What happens in this example could of course be described in
     other ways. I have chosen to describe it simply in terms of the
     substitution of one set of normative epithets for another. It could
     also be described, for instance, in terms of M’s visual imagery, or
     in simple or complex metaphors. But let us consider now what
     exactly ‘it’ is which is being described. It may be argued that
     there is nothing here which presents any special difficulty. For
     purposes of moral judgment we may define ‘actions’ in various
     ways. One way in this case would be to say that M decided to
     behave well to D and did so; and M’s private thoughts will be
     unimportant and morally irrelevant. If however it is desired to
     include in the list of M’s moral acts more than her overt
     behaviour shows, one will have to ask of the extra material: in
     what sense ‘moral’ and in what sense ‘acts’? Of course if M’s
     reflections were the prologue to different outer acts, then the
     reflections might be allowed to ‘belong’ to the acts as their
     ‘shadows’ and gain from them their identity and their importance: though the difficulty of discerning the inward part and
     connecting it with the outer as a condition of the latter could
     still be considerable. But what are we to say in the present case?
        Hampshire tells us: ‘Thought cannot be thought as opposed to
     day-dreaming or musing, unless it is directed towards a conclusion, whether in action or in judgement. . . . The idea of thought
     as an interior monologue . . . will become altogether empty if
     the thought does not even purport to be directed towards its
     issue in the external world. . . . Under these conditions thought
     and belief would not differ from the charmed and habitual
     rehearsal of phrases or the drifting of ideas through the mind.’
     Let us exclude from this discussion something which might at
     this point try to enter it, which is the eye of God. If M’s mental

=== p. 19 ===

events are not to depend for being and importance upon this
metaphysical witness, do we want to, and if so how can we,
rescue them from the fate of being mere nothings, at best
describable as day-dreams?
   It would be possible of course to give a hypothetical status to M’s
inner life, as follows. ‘M’s vision of D has altered means that if M
were to speak her mind about D now she would say different
things from the things she would have said three years ago.’ This
analysis avoids some difficulties but, like phenomenalism,
encounters others. The truth of the hypothetical proposition
could be consistent with nothing in the interim having occurred
in M’s mind at all. And of course a change of mind often does
take the form of the simple announcement of a new view without any introspectible material having intervened. But here ex
hypothesi there is at least something introspectible which has
occurred, however hazy this may be, and it is the status of this
which is in question. At any rate the idea which we are trying to
make sense of is that M has in the interim been active, she has
been doing something, something which we approve of, something which is somehow worth doing in itself. M has been
morally active in the interim: this is what we want to say and
to be philosophically permitted to say.
   At this point the defender of what I have called the
existentialist-behaviourist view may argue as follows. All right.
Either M has no introspectible material, in which case since M’s
conduct is constant it is hard to see what could be meant by
saying that she had changed her mind, other than saying that a
hypothetical proposition is true which no one could know to be
true; or else M has introspectible material and let us see what this
might be like. M may imagine saying things to D, may verbally
describe D in her mind, may brood on visual images of D. But
what do these goings-on mean? What is to count here as serious
judgment as opposed to ‘the charmed and habitual rehearsal of
phrases?’ M’s introspectabilia are likely on examination to prove

=== p. 20 ===

     hazy and hard to describe; and even if (at best) we imagine M as
     making clear verbal statements to herself, the identity and meaning of these statements is a function of the public world. She can
     only be thought of as ‘speaking’ seriously, and not parrot-like, if
     the outer context logically permits.
        The point can also be made, it may be said in parenthesis, that
     the identity of inward thoughts is established via the public
     meaning of the symbolism used in thinking. (See, e.g., Ayer,
     Thinking and Meaning.) This should refute claims to ‘ineffable
     experience’, etc. Philosophers have more recently chosen to
     emphasize the ‘shadow’ view, that is to consider the particular
     sense of the thought via context rather than the general sense of
     the thought via symbols. But I think the points are worth separating. They represent two complementary pictures of the ‘self’ or
     ‘will’ as outside the network of logical rules, free to decide
     where to risk its tyranny, but thereafter caught in an impersonal
     complex. I can decide what to say but not what the words mean
     which I have said. I can decide what to do but I am not master of
     the significance of my act.
        Someone who says privately or overtly ‘I have decided’ but
     who never acts, however favourable the circumstances (the
     existentialist-behaviourist argument continues), has not
     decided. Private decisions which precede public actions may be
     thought of as the ‘shadow’ of the act, gaining their title from
     being part of a complex properly called ‘decision’: though even
     here the term ‘decision’ if applied to the inner part only would
     be a courtesy title since there is no check upon the nature or
     existence of the inner part and its connection with the outer.
     Still, that is the situation in which we innocuously and popularly
     speak of ‘private decisions’ or ‘inner acts’, i.e., where some kind
     of outer structure is present and we may if we like picture,
     perhaps we naturally picture, an inner piece too. In M’s case,
     however, since there is no outward alteration of structure to
     correspond to an alleged inner change, no sequence of outer

=== p. 21 ===

events of which the inner can claim to be shadows, it is dubious
whether any sense can be given here to the idea of ‘activity’. The
attempted categorical sense of M’s inner progress has to fall back
on the hypothetical sense mentioned above. And the hypothetical proposition cannot be known to be true, even by M, and
could be true without anything happening in M’s mind at all. So
the idea of M as inwardly active turns out to be an empty one.
There is only outward activity, ergo only outward moral activity,
and what we call inward activity is merely the shadow of this
cast back into the mind. And, it may be bracingly added, why
worry? As Kant said, what we are commanded to do is to love
our neighbour in a practical and not a pathological sense.
   This is one of those exasperating moments in philosophy
when one seems to be being relentlessly prevented from saying
something which one is irresistibly impelled to say. And of
course, as Wittgenstein pointed out, the fact that one is irresistibly impelled to say it need not mean that anything else is the case.
Let us tread carefully here. In reacting against the above analysis
there is certainly one thing which I do not wish to maintain, and
that is that we have infallible or superior knowledge of our mental states. We can be mistaken about what we think and feel: that
is not in dispute, and indeed it is a strength of the behaviourist
analysis that it so neatly accommodates this fact. What is at stake
is something different, something about activity in a sense which
does not mean privileged activity.
   Let me try in a rough ordinary way and as yet without justification to say what I take to be, in spite of the analysis, the case
about M: a view which is not congruent with the analysis and
which if true shows that the analysis cannot be correct. The
analysis pictures M as defined ‘from the outside in’: M’s individuality lies in her will, understood as her ‘movements’. The
analysis makes no sense of M as continually active, as making
progress, or of her inner acts as belonging to her or forming part
of a continuous fabric of being: it is precisely critical of

=== p. 22 ===

     metaphors such as ‘fabric of being’. Yet can we do without such
     metaphors here? Further, is not the metaphor of vision almost
     irresistibly suggested to anyone who, without philosophical
     prejudice, wishes to describe the situation? Is it not the natural
     metaphor? M looks at D, she attends to D, she focuses her attention. M is engaged in an internal struggle. She may for instance
     be tempted to enjoy caricatures of D in her imagination. (There is
     curiously little place in the other picture for the idea of struggle.)
     And M’s activity here, so far from being something very odd
     and hazy, is something which, in a way, we find exceedingly
     familiar. Innumerable novels contain accounts of what such
     struggles are like. Anybody could describe one without being at
     a loss for words. This activity, as I said, could be described in a
     variety of ways, but one very natural way is by the use of specialized normative words, what one might call the secondary moral
     words in contrast to the primary and general ones such as
     ‘good’. M stops seeing D as ‘bumptious’ and sees her as ‘gay’,
     etc. I shall comment later upon the importance of these secondary words. Further again, one feels impelled to say something
     like: M’s activity is peculiarly her own. Its details are the details of
     this personality; and partly for this reason it may well be an
     activity which can only be performed privately. M could not do
     this thing in conversation with another person. Hampshire says
     that ‘anything which is to count as a definite reality must be
     open to several observers’. But can this quasi-scientific notion of
     individuation through unspecified observers really be applied to
     a case like this? Here there is an activity but no observers; and if
     one were to introduce the idea of potential observers the question of their competence would still arise. M’s activity is hard to
     characterize not because it is hazy but precisely because it is moral.
     And with this, as I shall shortly try to explain, we are coming
     near to the centre of the difficulty.
        What M is ex hypothesi attempting to do is not just to see D
     accurately but to see her justly or lovingly. Notice the rather

=== p. 23 ===

different image of freedom which this at once suggests. Freedom
is not the sudden jumping of the isolated will in and out of an
impersonal logical complex, it is a function of the progressive
attempt to see a particular object clearly. M’s activity is essentially something progressive, something infinitely perfectible. So
far from claiming for it a sort of infallibility, this new picture has
built in the notion of a necessary fallibility. M is engaged in an
endless task. As soon as we begin to use words such as ‘love’ and
‘justice’ in characterizing M, we introduce into our whole conceptual picture of her situation the idea of progress, that is the
idea of perfection: and it is just the presence of this idea which
demands an analysis of mental concepts which is different from
the genetic one.
   I am now inclined to think that it is pointless, when faced
with the existentialist-behaviourist picture of the mind, to go on
endlessly fretting about the identification of particular inner
events, and attempting to defend an account of M as ‘active’ by
producing, as it were, a series of indubitably objective little
things. ‘Not a report’ need not entail ‘not an activity’. But to
elaborate this what is needed is some sort of change of key, some
moving of the attack to a different front. Let us consider for a
moment the apparently so plausible idea of identity as dependent upon observers and rules, an idea which leads on directly to
the genetic analysis of mental concepts. This is really red if
several people agree about the description, indeed this is what
being really red means. He really decided, roughly, if people
agree that he kept the rules of the concept ‘decide’. To decide
means to keep these rules and the agent is not the only judge.
Actions are ‘moving things about in the public world’, and
what these movements are objective observers are actually and
potentially at hand to decide.
   Wittgenstein, as I have said, does not apply this idea to moral
concepts, nor discuss its relation to mental concepts in so far as
these form part of the sphere of morality. (That mental concepts

=== p. 24 ===

     enter the sphere of morality is, for my argument, precisely the
     central point.) But no limit is placed upon the idea either; and I
     should like to place a limit. What has enabled this idea of identification to go too far is partly, I think, an uncriticized conception
     of science which has taken on where Hume left off.
        Hume pictured a manifold of atoms, hard little indubitable
     sense-data or appearances, whose ‘subsequent’ arrangement
     provided the so-called material world. The Copernican Revolution of modern philosophy (‘You can’t have “knowledge” of
     “appearances” ’) removes the notion of certainty from the inside
     to the outside: public rules now determine what is certain. It
     may still be disputed whether one cannot sometimes give a sense
     to ‘being mistaken about an appearance’. There is certainly an
     area for discussion here, but this discussion has never become a
     very radical one. It has remained within the general terms of the
     revolution; and although it would be impossible to dispute the
     importance of that revolution it has nevertheless been so far in
     effect a continuation of Hume by other means. (The work of
     J. L. Austin for instance is a detailed and brilliant exorcism
     of the notion of the sense-impression. Yet by substituting an
     impersonal language-world for the old impersonal atom-world
     of Hume and Russell he in a way ‘saves’ the latter.) What the
     philosopher is trying to characterize, indeed to justify, is still
     the idea of an impersonal world of facts: the hard objective
     world out of which the will leaps into a position of isolation.
     What defines and constitutes fact has been removed from one
     place to another, but the radical idea of ‘fact’ remains much the
     same. Logic (impersonal rules) here obliges science with a
     philosophical model.
        What makes difficulties for this model is the conception of
     persons or individuals, a conception inseparable from morality.
     The whole vocabulary, so profoundly familiar to us, of ‘appearance’ and ‘reality’, whether as used by the old British empiricists
     or by modern empiricism, is blunt and crude when applied to

=== p. 25 ===

the human individual. Consider for instance the case of a man
trying privately to determine whether something which he
‘feels’ is repentance or not. Of course this investigation is subject
to some public rules, otherwise it would not be this investigation: and there could be doubts or disputes about whether it is
this investigation. But these apart, the activity in question must
remain a highly personal one upon which the prise of ‘the
impersonal world of language’ is to say the least problematic: or
rather it is an activity which puts in question the existence of
such an impersonal world. Here an individual is making a specialized personal use of a concept. Of course he derives the concept initially from his surroundings; but he takes it away into his
privacy. Concepts of this sort lend themselves to such uses; and
what use is made of them is partly a function of the user’s history.
Hume and Kant, the two patron saints of modern philosophy,
abhor history, each in his own way, and abhor the particular
notion of privacy which history implies. A certain conception of
logic and a certain conception of science also abhor history.
   But once the historical individual is ‘let in’ a number of things
have to be said with a difference. The idea of ‘objective reality’,
for instance, undergoes important modifications when it is to be
understood, not in relation to ‘the world described by science’,
but in relation to the progressing life of a person. The active
‘reassessing’ and ‘redefining’ which is a main characteristic of
live personality often suggests and demands a checking procedure which is a function of an individual history. Repentance
may mean something different to an individual at different times
in his life, and what it fully means is a part of this life and cannot
be understood except in context.
   There is of course a ‘science’ which concerns itself especially
with the history of the individual: psychoanalysis. And with a
determination at all costs not to part company with a scientific
conception of ‘the objective’ it is to psycho-analysis that
Professor Hampshire finally appeals: he very properly lets in the

=== p. 26 ===

     historical individual, but hopes to keep him by this means upon
     a lead. Hampshire reads in an impersonal background to the
     individual’s checking procedure with the help of the notion of
     an ideal analysis. The analyst is pictured as somehow ‘there’, as
     the ultimate competent observer playing the part of the eye of
     God. Hampshire allows that it is possible in theory though not in
     practice to ‘approach complete explanations of inclination and
     behaviour in any individual case through an interminable analysis’. But why should some unspecified psychoanalyst be the
     measure of all things? Psychoanalysis is a muddled embryonic
     science, and even if it were not there is no argument that I know
     of that can show us that we have got to treat its concepts as
     fundamental. The notion of an ‘ideal analysis’ is a misleading
     one. There is no existing series the extension of which could
     lead to such an ideal. This is a moral question; and what is at stake
     here is the liberation of morality, and of philosophy as a study of
     human nature, from the domination of science: or rather from
     the domination of inexact ideas of science which haunt philosophers and other thinkers. Because of the lack until fairly
     recently of any clear distinction between science and philosophy
     this issue has never presented itself so vividly before. Philosophy
     in the past has played the game of science partly because it
     thought it was science.
        Existentialism, in both its Continental and its Anglo-Saxon
     versions, is an attempt to solve the problem without really facing
     it: to solve it by attributing to the individual an empty lonely
     freedom, a freedom, if he wishes, to ‘fly in the face of the facts’.
     What it pictures is indeed the fearful solitude of the individual
     marooned upon a tiny island in the middle of a sea of scientific
     facts, and morality escaping from science only by a wild leap of
     the will. But our situation is not like this. To put it simply and in
     terms of the example which we have considered of M and her
     daughter-in-law: even if M were given a full psychoanalytical
     explanation of her conduct to D she need not be confined by

=== p. 27 ===

such an explanation. This is not just because M has a senseless
petulant freedom which enables her to be blind, nor is it just
because (the more subtle view favoured by Hampshire) she is
then enabled to redeploy her psychic forces on a ground of
greater knowledge. It is because M is not forced to adopt these
concepts at all, in preference say to any particular set of moral or
religious concepts. Science can instruct morality at certain points
and can change its direction, but it cannot contain morality, nor
ergo moral philosophy. The importance of this issue can more
easily be ignored by a philosophy which divorces freedom and
knowledge, and leaves knowledge (via an uncriticized idea of
‘impersonal reasons’) in the domain of science. But M’s
independence of science and of the ‘world of facts’ which
empiricist philosophy has created in the scientific image rests
not simply in her moving will but in her seeing knowing mind.
Moral concepts do not move about within a hard world set up by
science and logic. They set up, for different purposes, a different
world.
   Let me try now to explain more positively what it is about
moral concepts which puts them entirely out of relation with the
behaviourist view with its genetic explanation of mental phenomena. I want here to connect two ideas: the idea of the individual and the idea of perfection. Love is knowledge of the
individual. M confronted with D has an endless task. Moral tasks
are characteristically endless not only because ‘within’, as it
were, a given concept our efforts are imperfect, but also because
as we move and as we look our concepts themselves are changing. To speak here of an inevitable imperfection, or of an ideal
limit of love or knowledge which always recedes, may be taken
as a reference to our ‘fallen’ human condition, but this need be
given no special dogmatic sense. Since we are neither angels nor
animals but human individuals, our dealings with each other
have this aspect; and this may be regarded as an empirical fact or,
by those who favour such terminology, as a synthetic a priori truth.

=== p. 28 ===

        The entry into a mental concept of the notion of an ideal limit
     destroys the genetic analysis of its meaning. (Hampshire allowed
     the idea of perfection to touch one concept only, that of intention: but he tried to save this concept from morality by making
     the ideal limit a scientific one.) Let us see how this is. Is ‘love’ a
     mental concept, and if so can it be analysed genetically? No
     doubt Mary’s little lamb loved Mary, that is it followed her to
     school; and in some sense of ‘learn’ we might well learn the
     concept, the word, in that context. But with such a concept that
     is not the end of the matter. (Nor indeed the beginning either.)
     Words may mislead us here since words are often stable while
     concepts alter; we have a different image of courage at forty from
     that which we had at twenty. A deepening process, at any rate an
     altering and complicating process, takes place. There are two
     senses of ‘knowing what a word means’, one connected with
     ordinary language and the other very much less so. Knowledge
     of a value concept is something to be understood, as it were, in
     depth, and not in terms of switching on to some given
     impersonal network. Moreover, if morality is essentially connected with change and progress, we cannot be as democratic
     about it as some philosophers would like to think. We do not
     simply, through being rational and knowing ordinary language,
     ‘know’ the meaning of all necessary moral words. We may have
     to learn the meaning; and since we are human historical individuals the movement of understanding is onward into increasing privacy, in the direction of the ideal limit, and not back
     towards a genesis in the rulings of an impersonal public
     language.
        None of what I am saying here is particularly new: similar
     things have been said by philosophers from Plato onward; and
     appear as commonplaces of the Christian ethic, whose centre is
     an individual. To come nearer home in the Platonic tradition, the
     present dispute is reminiscent of the old arguments about
     abstract and concrete universals. My view might be put by

=== p. 29 ===

saying: moral terms must be treated as concrete universals. And
if someone at this point were to say, well, why stop at moral
concepts, why not claim that all universals are concrete, I would
reply, why not indeed? Why not consider red as an ideal endpoint, as a concept infinitely to be learned, as an individual
object of love? A painter might say, ‘You don’t know what “red”
means.’ This would be, by a counter-attack, to bring the idea of
value, which has been driven by science and logic into a corner,
back to cover the whole field of knowledge. But this would be
part of a different argument and is not my concern here. Perhaps
all concepts could be considered in this way: all I am now
arguing is that some concepts must be.
   In suggesting that the central concept of morality is ‘the individual’ thought of as knowable by love, thought of in the light of
the command, ‘Be ye therefore perfect’, I am not, in spite of the
philosophical backing which I might here resort to, suggesting
anything in the least esoteric. In fact this would, to the ordinary
person, be a very much more familiar image than the existentialist one. We ordinarily conceive of and apprehend goodness in
terms of virtues which belong to a continuous fabric of being.
And it is just the historical, individual, nature of the virtues as
actually exemplified which makes it difficult to learn goodness
from another person. It is all very well to say that ‘to copy a right
action is to act rightly’ (Hampshire, Logic and Appreciation), but
what is the form which I am supposed to copy? It is a truism of
recent philosophy that this operation of discerning the form is
fairly easy, that rationality in this simple sense is a going concern. And of course for certain conventional purposes it is. But it
is characteristic of morals that one cannot rest entirely at the
conventional level, and that in some ways one ought not to.
   We might consider in this context the ambiguity of Kant’s
position in the Grundlegung, where he tells us that when confronted with the person of Christ we must turn back to the
pattern of rationality in our own bosoms and decide whether or

=== p. 30 ===

     not we approve of the man we see. Kant is often claimed as a
     backer of the existentialist view: and these words may readily be
     taken to advocate that return to self, that concern with the purity
     of the solitary will, which is favoured by all brands of existentialism. Here I stand alone, in total responsibility and freedom, and
     can only properly and responsibly do what is intelligible to me,
     what I can do with a clear intention. But it must be remembered
     that Kant was a ‘metaphysical naturalist’ and not an existentialist.
     Reason itself is for him an ideal limit: indeed his term ‘Idea of
     Reason’ expresses precisely that endless aspiration to perfection
     which is characteristic of moral activity. His is not the ‘achieved’
     or ‘given’ reason which belongs with ‘ordinary language’ and
     convention, nor is his man on the other hand totally unguided
     and alone. There exists a moral reality, a real though infinitely
     distant standard: the difficulties of understanding and imitating
     remain. And in a way it is perhaps a matter of tactics and temperament whether we should look at Christ or at Reason. Kant
     was especially impressed by the dangers of blind obedience to a
     person or an institution. But there are (as the history of existentialism shows) just as many dangers attaching to the ambiguous
     idea of finding the ideal in one’s own bosom. The argument for
     looking outward at Christ and not inward at Reason is that self is
     such a dazzling object that if one looks there one may see nothing
     else. But as I say, so long as the gaze is directed upon the ideal the
     exact formulation will be a matter of history and tactics in a
     sense which is not rigidly determined by religious dogma, and
     understanding of the ideal will be partial in any case. Where
     virtue is concerned we often apprehend more than we clearly
     understand and grow by looking.
        Let me suggest in more detail how I think this process actually
     happens. This will I hope enable me to clarify the status of the
     view I hold and to relate it to linguistic philosophy in particular.
     I have spoken of a process of deepening or complicating, a process of learning, a progress, which may take place in moral

=== p. 31 ===

concepts in the dimension which they possess in virtue of their
relation to an ideal limit. In describing the example of M and her
daughter-in-law I drew attention to the important part played by
the normative-descriptive words, the specialized or secondary
value words. (Such as ‘vulgar’, ‘spontaneous’, etc.) By means of
these words there takes place what we might call ‘the siege of the
individual by concepts’. Uses of such words are both instruments and symptoms of learning. Learning takes place when
such words are used, either aloud or privately, in the context of
particular acts of attention. (M attending to D.) This is a point to
be emphasized. That words are not timeless, that word-utterances are historical occasions, has been noted by some
philosophers for some purposes. (Strawson notes it when attacking the Theory of Descriptions.) But the full implications of this
fact, with its consequences for the would-be timeless image of
reason, have not, in our modern philosophy, been fully drawn.
As Plato observes at the end of the Phaedrus, words themselves do
not contain wisdom. Words said to particular individuals at particular times may occasion wisdom. Words, moreover, have both
spatio-temporal and conceptual contexts. We learn through
attending to contexts, vocabulary develops through close attention to objects, and we can only understand others if we can to
some extent share their contexts. (Often we cannot.) Uses of
words by persons grouped round a common object is a central
and vital human activity. The art critic can help us if we are in
the presence of the same object and if we know something about
his scheme of concepts. Both contexts are relevant to our ability
to move towards ‘seeing more’, towards ‘seeing what he sees’.
Here, as so often, an aesthetic analogy is helpful for morals. M
could be helped by someone who both knew D and whose
conceptual scheme M could understand or in that context begin
to understand. Progress in understanding of a scheme of concepts often takes place as we listen to normative-descriptive talk
in the presence of a common object. I have been speaking, in

=== p. 32 ===

     relation to our example, of progress or change for the better, but
     of course such change (and this is more commonly to be
     observed) may also be for the worse. Everyday conversation is
     not necessarily a morally neutral activity and certain ways of
     describing people can be corrupting and wrong. A smart set of
     concepts may be a most efficient instrument of corruption. It is
     especially characteristic of normative words, both desirable and
     undesirable, to belong to sets or patterns without an appreciation of which they cannot be understood. If a critic tells us that
     a picture has ‘functional colour’ or ‘significant form’ we need to
     know not only the picture but also something about his general
     theory in order to understand the remark. Similarly, if M says D
     is ‘common’, although the term does not belong to a technical
     vocabulary, this use of it can only be fully understood if we
     know not only D but M.
         This dependence of language upon contexts of attention has
     consequences. Language is far more idiosyncratic than has been
     admitted. Reasons are not necessarily and qua reasons public.
     They may be reasons for a very few, and none the worse for that.
     ‘I can’t explain. You’d have to know her.’ If the common object
     is lacking, communication may break down and the same words
     may occasion different results in different hearers. This may
     seem on reflection very obvious; but philosophy is often a matter of finding a suitable context in which to say the obvious.
     Human beings are obscure to each other, in certain respects
     which are particularly relevant to morality, unless they are
     mutual objects of attention or have common objects of attention,
     since this affects the degree of elaboration of a common vocabulary. We develop language in the context of looking: the metaphor of vision again. The notion of privileged access to inner
     events has been held morally suspect because, among other
     things, it would separate people from ‘the ordinary world of
     rational argument’. But the unavoidable contextual privacy of
     language already does this, and except at a very simple and

=== p. 33 ===

conventional level of communication there is no such ordinary
world. This conclusion is feared and avoided by many moralists
because it seems inimical to the operation of reason and because
reason is construed on a scientific model. Scientific language
tries to be impersonal and exact and yet accessible for purposes
of teamwork; and the degree of accessibility can be decided in
relation to definite practical goals. Moral language which relates
to a reality infinitely more complex and various than that of
science is often unavoidably idiosyncratic and inaccessible.
   Words are the most subtle symbols which we possess and our
human fabric depends on them. The living and radical nature of
language is something which we forget at our peril. It is totally
misleading to speak, for instance, of ‘two cultures’, one literary-humane and the other scientific, as if these were of equal status.
There is only one culture, of which science, so interesting and so
dangerous, is now an important part. But the most essential and
fundamental aspect of culture is the study of literature, since this
is an education in how to picture and understand human situations. We are men and we are moral agents before we are scientists, and the place of science in human life must be discussed in
words. This is why it is and always will be more important to
know about Shakespeare than to know about any scientist: and if
there is a ‘Shakespeare of science’ his name is Aristotle.
   I have used the word ‘attention’, which I borrow from
Simone Weil, to express the idea of a just and loving gaze
directed upon an individual reality. I believe this to be the characteristic and proper mark of the active moral agent. ‘Characteristic’ and ‘proper’ suggest in turn a logical and a normative
claim; and I shall discuss below how far what I say is to be taken
as recommendation and how far as description. In any case a
theory, whether normative or logical, is the more attractive the
more it explains, the more its structure may be seen as underlying things which are familiar to us in ordinary life. I want now
to go on to argue that the view I am suggesting offers a more

=== p. 34 ===

     satisfactory account of human freedom than does the existentialist view. I have classified together as existentialist both philosophers such as Sartre who claim the title, and philosophers such
     as Hampshire, Hare, Ayer, who do not. Characteristic of both is
     the identification of the true person with the empty choosing
     will, and the corresponding emphasis upon the idea of movement rather than vision. This emphasis will go with the anti-naturalistic bias of existentialism. There is no point in talking of
     ‘moral seeing’ since there is nothing morally to see. There is no
     moral vision. There is only the ordinary world which is seen
     with ordinary vision, and there is the will that moves within it.
     What may be called the Kantian wing and the Surrealist wing of
     existentialism may be distinguished by the degree of their
     interest in reasons for action, which diminishes to nothing at the
     Surrealist end.
        Our British philosophers are of course very interested in
     reasons, emphasizing, as I have said, the accessibility, the non-esoteric nature of moral reasoning. But the production of such
     reasons, it is argued (and this is indeed the point of emphasizing
     their impersonal character), does not in any way connect or tie
     the agent to the world or to special personal contexts within the
     world. He freely chooses his reasons in terms of, and after surveying, the ordinary facts which lie open to everyone: and he
     acts. This operation, it is argued, is the exercise of freedom. This
     image of man as a highly conscious self-contained being is
     offered by some philosophers as a donné and by others, e.g.
     Hampshire, as a norm; although Hampshire is careful to give the
     norm a scientific background.
        Let us now ask quite simply if this is realistic, if this is what, in
     our experience, moral choice is like. It might seem at first that
     the existentialists have an advantage in that they do account for a
     peculiar feature of moral choice, which is the strange emptiness
     which often occurs at the moment of choosing. Of course
     choices happen at various levels of consciousness, importance,

=== p. 35 ===

and difficulty. In a simple easy unimportant choice there is no
need to regard ‘what goes on’ as anything beyond the obvious
sequence of reason, decision, action, or just reason, action; and
such choices may properly be regarded as ‘impersonal’. ‘Shall I
go? Oh yes, I promised to.’ I receive my bill and I pay it. But
difficult and painful choices often present this experience of
void of which so much has been made: this sense of not being
determined by the reasons. This sensation is hailed with delight
by both wings of existentialism. The Kantian wing claims it as
showing that we are free in relation to the reasons and the Surrealist wing claims it as showing that there are no reasons.
Indeed this experience of emptiness seems perfectly to verify the
notion that freedom is simply the movement of the lonely will.
Choice is outward movement since there is nothing else there
for it to be.
   But is this the case, and ought we really to be so pleased about
this experience? A more sombre note concerning it is struck at
one point by Sartre, who on this problem veers wildly between
Kantianism and Surrealism. Quand je délibère les jeux sont faits. If we
are so strangely separate from the world at moments of choice
are we really choosing at all, are we right indeed to identify
ourselves with this giddy empty will? (Hampshire: ‘I identify
myself with my will.’) In a reaction of thought which is never
far from the minds of more extreme existentialists (Dostoevsky
for instance), one may turn here towards determinism, towards
fatalism, towards regarding freedom as a complete illusion.
When I deliberate the die is already cast. Forces within me which
are dark to me have already made the decision.
   This view is if anything less attractive and less realistic than the
other one. Do we really have to choose between an image of total
freedom and an image of total determinism? Can we not give a
more balanced and illuminating account of the matter? I suggest
we can if we simply introduce into the picture the idea of attention, or looking, of which I was speaking above. I can only choose

=== p. 36 ===

     within the world I can see, in the moral sense of ‘see’ which
     implies that clear vision is a result of moral imagination and
     moral effort. There is also of course ‘distorted vision’, and the
     word ‘reality’ here inevitably appears as a normative word.
     When M is just and loving she sees D as she really is. One is often
     compelled almost automatically by what one can see. If we ignore
     the prior work of attention and notice only the emptiness of the
     moment of choice we are likely to identify freedom with the
     outward movement since there is nothing else to identify it
     with. But if we consider what the work of attention is like, how
     continuously it goes on, and how imperceptibly it builds up
     structures of value round about us, we shall not be surprised that
     at crucial moments of choice most of the business of choosing is
     already over. This does not imply that we are not free, certainly
     not. But it implies that the exercise of our freedom is a small
     piecemeal business which goes on all the time and not a grandiose leaping about unimpeded at important moments. The moral
     life, on this view, is something that goes on continually, not
     something that is switched off in between the occurrence of
     explicit moral choices. What happens in between such choices is
     indeed what is crucial. I would like on the whole to use the word
     ‘attention’ as a good word and use some more general term like
     ‘looking’ as the neutral word. Of course psychic energy flows,
     and more readily flows, into building up convincingly coherent
     but false pictures of the world, complete with systematic vocabulary. (M seeing D as pert-common-juvenile, etc.) Attention is the
     effort to counteract such states of illusion.
        On this view we are certainly in a sense less free than we are
     pictured as being on the other view, in that the latter presents a
     condition of perfect freedom as being either our unavoidable
     fate (the Surrealists) or our conceivably attainable goal (the Kan-tians). Freedom for Hampshire is a matter of having crystal-clear
     intentions. But on the view which I suggest, which connects
     morality with attention to individuals, human individuals or

=== p. 37 ===

individual realities of other kinds, the struggle and the progress
is something more obscure, more historically conditioned, and
usually less clearly conscious. Freedom, itself a moral concept
and not just a prerequisite of morality, cannot here be separated
from the idea of knowledge. That of which it is knowledge, that
‘reality’ which we are so naturally led to think of as revealed by
just ‘attention’, can of course, given the variety of human personality and situation, only be thought of as ‘one’, as a single
object for all men, in some very remote and ideal sense. It is a
deep paradox of moral philosophy that almost all philosophers
have been led in one way or another to picture goodness as
knowledge: and yet to show this in any sort of detail, to show
‘reality’ as ‘one’, seems to involve an improper prejudging of
some moral issue. An acute consciousness of this latter difficulty
has indeed made it seem axiomatic to recent philosophers that
‘naturalism is a fallacy’. But I would suggest that at the level of
serious common sense and of an ordinary non-philosophical
reflection about the nature of morals it is perfectly obvious that
goodness is connected with knowledge: not with impersonal
quasi-scientific knowledge of the ordinary world, whatever that
may be, but with a refined and honest perception of what is
really the case, a patient and just discernment and exploration of
what confronts one, which is the result not simply of opening
one’s eyes but of a certainly perfectly familiar kind of moral
discipline.
   What then of the ‘void’, the experience of Angst of which
the existentialists have told us so much? If it cannot be understood in their sense as an experience of pure freedom, what is it,
and does it really occur at all? Perhaps there are several different
conditions involved here. But the central one, the heart of the
concept, I think I would describe rather as a kind of fright which
the conscious will feels when it apprehends the strength and
direction of the personality which is not under its immediate
control. Innumerable ‘lookings’ have discovered and explored a

=== p. 38 ===

     world which is now (for better or worse) compulsively present to
     the will in a particular situation, and the will is dismayed by the
     feeling that it ought now to be everything and in fact is not. Angst
     may occur where there is any felt discrepancy between personality and ideals. Perhaps very simple people escape it and some
     civilizations have not experienced it at all. Extreme Angst, in the
     popular modern form, is a disease or addiction of those who are
     passionately convinced that personality resides solely in the conscious omnipotent will: and in so far as this conviction is wrong
     the condition partakes of illusion. It is obviously, in practice, a
     delicate moral problem to decide how far the will can coerce the
     formed personality (move in a world it cannot see) without merely
     occasioning disaster. The concept of Angst should of course be
     carefully distinguished from its ancestor, Kant’s Achtung, in which
     dismay at the frailty of the will is combined with an inspiring
     awareness of the reality which the will is drawn by (despair at
     the sensuous will, joy in the rational will). The loss of that
     awareness, or that faith, produces Angst, which is properly a condition of sober alarm. Those who are, or attempt to be, exhilarated by Angst, that is by the mere impotence of the will and its
     lack of connection with the personality, are, as I have suggested
     above, in danger of falling into fatalism or sheer irresponsibility.
        The place of choice is certainly a different one if we think in
     terms of a world which is compulsively present to the will, and the
     discernment and exploration of which is a slow business. Moral
     change and moral achievement are slow; we are not free in the
     sense of being able suddenly to alter ourselves since we cannot
     suddenly alter what we can see and ergo what we desire and are
     compelled by. In a way, explicit choice seems now less important: less decisive (since much of the ‘decision’ lies elsewhere)
     and less obviously something to be ‘cultivated’. If I attend properly I will have no choices and this is the ultimate condition to
     be aimed at. This is in a way the reverse of Hampshire’s picture,
     where our efforts are supposed to be directed to increasing our

=== p. 39 ===

freedom by conceptualizing as many different possibilities of
action as possible: having as many goods as possible in the shop.
The ideal situation, on the contrary, is rather to be represented as
a kind of ‘necessity’. This is something of which saints speak and
which any artist will readily understand. The idea of a patient,
loving regard, directed upon a person, a thing, a situation, presents the will not as unimpeded movement but as something very
much more like ‘obedience’.
   Will and reason then are not entirely separate faculties in the
moral agent. Will continually influences belief; for better or
worse, and is ideally able to influence it through a sustained
attention to reality. This is what Simone Weil means when she
says that ‘will is obedience not resolution’. As moral agents we
have to try to see justly, to overcome prejudice, to avoid temptation, to control and curb imagination, to direct reflection. Man is
not a combination of an impersonal rational thinker and a personal will. He is a unified being who sees, and who desires in
accordance with what he sees, and who has some continual
slight control over the direction and focus of his vision. There is
nothing, I think, in the foreground of this picture which is
unfamiliar to the ordinary person. Philosophical difficulties may
arise if we try to give any single organized background sense to
the normative word ‘reality’. But this word may be used as a
philosophical term provided its limitations are understood.
What is real may be ‘non-empirical’ without being in the grand
sense systematic. In particular situations ‘reality’ as that which is
revealed to the patient eye of love is an idea entirely comprehensible to the ordinary person. M knows what she is doing when
she tries to be just to D, and we know what she is doing too.
   I said that any artist would appreciate the notion of ill as
obedience to reality, an obedience which ideally teaches a position where there is no choice. One of the great merits of the
moral psychology which I am proposing is that it does not
contrast art and morals, but shows them to be two aspects of a

=== p. 40 ===

     single struggle. The existentialist-behaviourist view could give
     no satisfactory account of art: it was seen as a quasi-play activity,
     gratuitous, ‘for its own sake’ (the familiar Kantian-Bloomsbury
     slogan), a sort of by-product of our failure to be entirely
     rational. Such a view of art is of course intolerable. In one of
     those important movements of return from philosophical theory
     to simple things which we are certain of, we must come back to
     what we know about great art and about the moral insight
     which it contains and the moral achievement which it represents. Goodness and beauty are not to be contrasted, but are
     largely part of the same structure. Plato, who tells us that beauty
     is the only spiritual thing which we love immediately by nature,
     treats the beautiful as an introductory section of the good. So
     that aesthetic situations are not so much analogies of morals as
     cases of morals. Virtue is au fond the same in the artist as in the
     good man in that it is a selfless attention to nature: something
     which is easy to name but very hard to achieve. Artists who have
     reflected have frequently given expression to this idea. (For
     instance, Rilke praising Cézanne speaks of a ‘consuming of love
     in anonymous work’. Letter to Clara Rilke, 13 October 1907.)
        Since the existentialist-behaviourist view wished to conceive
     of will as pure movement separated from reason and to deprive
     reason of the use of normative words (since it was to be ‘objective’), the moral agent so envisaged could get along, was indeed
     almost forced to get along, with only the most empty and general moral terms such as ‘good’ and ‘right’. The empty moral
     words correspond here to the emptiness of the will. If the will is
     to be totally free the world it moves in must be devoid of normative characteristics, so that morality can reside entirely in the
     pointer of pure choice. On my view it might be said that, per
     contra, the primary general words could be dispensed with
     entirely and all moral work could be done by the secondary
     specialized words. If we picture the agent as compelled by
     obedience to the reality he can see, he will not be saying ‘This is

=== p. 41 ===

right’, i.e., ‘I choose to do this’, he will be saying ‘This is A B C
D’ (normative-descriptive words), and action will follow naturally. As the empty choice will not occur the empty word will not
be needed. It would however be far from my intention to
demote or dispense with the term ‘good’: but rather to restore to
it the dignity and authority which it possessed before Moore appeared on the scene. I have spoken of efforts of attention directed upon individuals and of obedience to reality as an exercise
of love, and have suggested that ‘reality’ and ‘individual’ present
themselves to us in moral contexts as ideal end-points or Ideas of
Reason. This surely is the place where the concept of good lives.
‘Good’: ‘Real’: ‘Love’. These words are closely connected. And
here we retrieve the deep sense of the indefinability of good,
which has been given a trivial sense in recent philosophy. Good
is indefinable not for the reasons offered by Moore’s successors,
but because of the infinite difficulty of the task of apprehending
a magnetic but inexhaustible reality. Moore was in a way nearer
the truth than he realized when he tried to say both that Good
was there and that one could say nothing of what it essentially
was. If apprehension of good is apprehension of the individual
and the real, then good partakes of the infinite elusive character
of reality.
    I have several times indicated that the image which I am offering should be thought of as a general metaphysical background
to morals and not as a formula which can be illuminatingly
introduced into any and every moral act. There exists, so far as I
know, no formula of the latter kind. We are not always the individual in pursuit of the individual, we are not always responding
to the magnetic pull of the idea of perfection. Often, for instance
when we pay our bills or perform other small everyday acts, we
are just ‘anybody’ doing what is proper or making simple
choices for ordinary public reasons; and this is the situation
which some philosophers have chosen exclusively to analyse.
Furthermore, I am well aware of the moral dangers of the idea of

=== p. 42 ===

     morality as something which engages the whole person and
     which may lead to specialized and esoteric vision and language.
     Give and take between the private and the public levels of morality is often of advantage to both and indeed is normally unavoidable. In fact the ‘conventional’ level is often not so simple as it
     seems, and the quaintly phrased hymn which I sang in my
     childhood, ‘Who sweeps a room as for Thy laws makes that and
     the action fine’, was not talking foolishly. The task of attention
     goes on all the time and at apparently empty and everyday
     moments we are ‘looking’, making those little peering efforts of
     imagination which have such important cumulative results.
        I would not be understood, either, as suggesting that insight
     or pureness of heart are more important than action: the thing
     which philosophers feared Moore for implying. Overt actions
     are perfectly obviously important in themselves, and important
     too because they are the indispensable pivot and spur of the
     inner scene. The inner, in this sense, cannot do without the outer.
     I do not mean only that outer rituals make places for inner
     experiences; but also that an overt action can release psychic
     energies which can be released in no other way. We often receive
     an unforeseen reward for a fumbling half-hearted act: a place for
     the idea of grace. I have suggested that we have to accept a darker,
     less fully conscious, less steadily rational image of the dynamics
     of the human personality. With this dark entity behind us we
     may sometimes decide to act abstractly by rule, to ignore vision
     and the compulsive energy derived from it; and we may find that
     as a result both energy and vision are unexpectedly given. To
     decide when to attempt such leaps is one of the most difficult of
     moral problems. But if we do leap ahead of what we know we
     still have to try to catch up. Will cannot run very far ahead of
     knowledge, and attention is our daily bread.
        Of course what I have been offering here is not and does not
     pretend to be a ‘neutral logical analysis’ of what moral agents or
     moral terms are like. The picture offered by, e.g., Hampshire is of

=== p. 43 ===

course not neutral either, as he admits in parenthesis. (Thought and
Action, Chapter Two.) ‘A decision has to be made between two
conceptions of personality. . . . It may be that in a society in
which a man’s theoretical opinions and religious beliefs were
held to be supremely important, a man’s beliefs would be considered as much part of his responsibility as his behaviour to
other men.’ And he contrasts this with ‘a utilitarian culture’.
Hampshire speaks here of a ‘decision’; and there is always an
existentialist ‘short way’ with any rival theory: to say, ‘You use
that picture, but you choose to use it.’ This is to make the existentialist picture the ultimate one. I would wish to exclude any such
undercutting of my theory. To say that it is a normative theory is
not to say that it is an object of free choice: modern philosophy
has equated these ideas but this is just the equation I am objecting to. I offer frankly a sketch of a metaphysical theory, a kind of
inconclusive non-dogmatic naturalism, which has the circularity
of definition characteristic of such theories. The rival theory is
similarly circular; and as I have explained I do not find that its
radical arguments convincingly establish its sweeping moral and
psychological conclusions.
   Philosophers have always been trying to picture the human
soul, and since morality needs such pictures and as science is, as
I have argued, in no position to coerce morality, there seems no
reason why philosophers should not go on attempting to fill in a
systematic explanatory background to our ordinary moral life.
Hampshire said, and I quoted this at the start, that ‘it is the
constructive task of the philosophy of mind to provide a set of
terms in which ultimate judgements of value can be very clearly
stated’. I would put what I think is much the same task in terms
of the provision of rich and fertile conceptual schemes which
help us to reflect upon and understand the nature of moral progress and moral failure and the reasons for the divergence of one
moral temperament from another. And I would wish to make my
theory undercut its existentialist rivals by suggesting that it is

=== p. 44 ===

     possible in terms of the former to explain why people are
     obsessed with the latter, but not vice versa. In any case, the sketch
     which I have offered, a footnote in a great and familiar philosophical tradition, must be judged by its power to connect, to
     illuminate, to explain, and to make new and fruitful places for
     reflection.

