=== chunk: murdoch-1970-sovereignty-of-good/ch2-on-god-and-good ===
title: On 'God' and 'Good'
source_pdf: docs/sources/murdoch-1970-sovereignty-of-good/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 64-93
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 45
plan_page_end: 74
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 45 ===

        ON ‘GOD’ AND ‘GOOD’

To do philosophy is to explore one’s own temperament, and yet
at the same time to attempt to discover the truth. It seems to me
that there is a void in present-day moral philosophy. Areas peripheral to philosophy expand (psychology, political and social
theory) or collapse (religion) without philosophy being able in
the one case to encounter, and in the other case to rescue, the
values involved. A working philosophical psychology is needed
which can at least attempt to connect modern psychological
terminology with a terminology concerned with virtue. We
need a moral philosophy which can speak significantly of Freud
and Marx, and out of which aesthetic and political views can be
generated. We need a moral philosophy in which the concept of
love, so rarely mentioned now by philosophers, can once again
be made central.
   It will be said, we have got a working philosophy, and one
which is the proper heir to the past of European philosophy:
existentialism. This philosophy does so far pervade the scene
that philosophers, many linguistic analysts for instance, who

=== p. 46 ===

     would not claim the name, do in fact work with existentialist
     concepts. I shall argue that existentialism is not, and cannot by
     tinkering be made, the philosophy we need. Although it is
     indeed the heir of the past, it is (it seems to me) an unrealistic
     and over-optimistic doctrine and the purveyor of certain false
     values. This is more obviously true of flimsier creeds, such as
     ‘humanism’, with which people might now attempt to fill the
     philosophical void.
        The great merit of existentialism is that it at least professes and
     tries to be a philosophy one could live by. Kierkegaard described
     the Hegelian system as a grand palace set up by someone who
     then lived in a hovel or at best in the porter’s lodge. A moral
     philosophy should be inhabited. Existentialism has shown itself
     capable of becoming a popular philosophy and of getting into
     the minds of those (e.g. Oxford philosophers) who have not
     sought it and may even be unconscious of its presence. However,
     although it can certainly inspire action, it seems to me to do so
     by a sort of romantic provocation rather than by its truth; and its
     pointers are often pointing in the wrong direction. Wittgenstein
     claimed that he brought the Cartesian era in philosophy to an
     end. Moral philosophy of an existentialist type is still Cartesian
     and egocentric. Briefly put, our picture of ourselves has become
     too grand, we have isolated, and identified ourselves with, an
     unrealistic conception of will, we have lost the vision of a reality
     separate from ourselves, and we have no adequate conception of
     original sin. Kierkegaard rightly observed that ‘an ethic which
     ignores sin is an altogether useless science’, although he also
     added, ‘but if it recognizes sin it is eo ipso beyond its sphere’.
        Kant believed in Reason and Hegel believed in History, and
     for both this was a form of a belief in an external reality. Modern
     thinkers who believe in neither, but who remain within the
     tradition, are left with a denuded self whose only virtues are
     freedom, or at best sincerity, or, in the case of the British philosophers, an everyday reasonableness. Philosophy, on its other

=== p. 47 ===

fronts, has been busy dismantling the old substantial picture of
the ‘self’, and ethics has not proved able to rethink this concept
for moral purposes. The moral agent then is pictured as an isolated principle of will, or burrowing pinpoint of consciousness,
inside, or beside, a lump of being which has been handed over
to other disciplines, such as psychology or sociology. On the
one hand a Luciferian philosophy of adventures of the will, and
on the other natural science. Moral philosophy, and indeed
morals, are thus undefended against an irresponsible and
undirected self-assertion which goes easily hand in hand with
some brand of pseudo-scientific determinism. An unexamined
sense of the strength of the machine is combined with an illusion of leaping out of it. The younger Sartre, and many British
moral philosophers, represent this last dry distilment of Kant’s
views of the world. The study of motivation is surrendered to
empirical science: will takes the place of the complex of motives
and also of the complex of virtues.
   The history of British philosophy since Moore represents
intensively in miniature the special dilemmas of modern ethics.
Empiricism, especially in the form given to it by Russell, and
later by Wittgenstein, thrust ethic almost out of philosophy.
Moral judgments were not factual, or truthful, and had no place
in the world of the Tractatus. Moore, although he himself held a
curious metaphysic of ‘moral facts’, set the tone when he told us
that we must carefully distinguish the question ‘What things are
good?’ from the question ‘What does “good” mean?’ The
answer to the latter question concerned the will. Good was
indefinable (naturalism was a fallacy) because any offered good
could be scrutinized by any individual by a ‘stepping back’
movement. This form of Kantianism still retains its appeal. Witt-genstein had attacked the idea of the Cartesian ego or substantial
self and Ryle and others had developed the attack. A study of
‘ordinary language’ claimed (often rightly) to solve piecemeal
problems in epistemology which had formerly been discussed

=== p. 48 ===

     in terms of the activities or faculties of a ‘self’. (See John Austin’s
     book on certain problems of perception, Sense and Sensibilia.)
        Ethics took its place in this scene. After puerile attempts to
     classify moral statements as exclamations or expressions of emotion, a more sophisticated neo-Kantianism with a utilitarian
     atmosphere has been developed. The idea of the agent as a
     privileged centre of will (for ever capable of ‘stepping back’)
     is retained, but, since the old-fashioned ‘self ’ no longer clothes
     him he appears as an isolated will operating with the concepts of
     ‘ordinary language’, so far as the field of morals is concerned. (It
     is interesting that although Wittgenstein’s work has suggested
     this picture to others, he himself never used it.) Thus the will,
     and the psyche as an object of science, are isolated from each
     other and from the rest of philosophy. The cult of ordinary
     language goes with the claim to be neutral. Previous moral
     philosophers told us what we ought to do, that is they tried to
     answer both of Moore’s questions. Linguistic analysis claims
     simply to give a philosophical description of the human phenomenon of morality, without making any moral judgments. In
     fact the resulting picture of human conduct has a clear moral
     bias. The merits of linguistic analytical man are freedom (in the
     sense of detachment, rationality), responsibility, self-awareness,
     sincerity, and a lot of utilitarian common sense. There is of
     course no mention of sin, and no mention of love. Marxism is
     ignored, and there is on the whole no attempt at a rapprochement
     with psychology, although Professor Hampshire does try to
     develop the idea of self-awareness towards an ideal end-point by
     conceiving of ‘the perfect psychoanalysis’ which would make us
     perfectly self-aware and so perfectly detached and free.
        Linguistic analysis of course poses for ethics the question of
     its relation with metaphysics. Can ethics be a form of empiricism? Many philosophers in the Oxford and Cambridge tradition
     would say yes. It is certainly a great merit of this tradition, and
     one which I would not wish to lose sight of, that it attacks every

=== p. 49 ===

form of spurious unity. It is the traditional inspiration of the
philosopher, but also his traditional vice, to believe that all is one.
Wittgenstein says ‘Let’s see.’ Sometimes problems turn out to be
quite unconnected with each other, and demand types of solution which are not themselves closely related in any system.
Perhaps it is a matter of temperament whether or not one is
convinced that all is one. (My own temperament inclines to
monism.) But let us postpone the question of whether, if we
reject the relaxed empirical ethics of the British tradition (a
cheerful amalgam of Hume, Kant and Mill), and if we reject, too,
the more formal existentialist systems, we wish to replace these
with something which would have to be called a metaphysical
theory. Let me now simply suggest ways in which I take the
prevalent and popular picture to be unrealistic. In doing this my
debt to Simone Weil will become evident.
   Much of contemporary moral philosophy appears both
unambitious and optimistic. Unambitious optimism is of course
part of the Anglo-Saxon tradition; and it is also not surprising
that a philosophy which analyses moral concepts on the basis of
ordinary language should present a relaxed picture of a mediocre achievement. I think the charge is also true, though contrary to some appearances, of existentialism. An authentic mode
of existence is presented as attainable by intelligence and force of
will. The atmosphere is invigorating and tends to produce self-satisfaction in the reader, who feels himself to be a member of
the élite, addressed by another one. Contempt for the ordinary
human condition, together with a conviction of personal salvation, saves the writer from real pessimism. His gloom is superficial and conceals elation. (I think this to be true in different
ways of both Sartre and Heidegger, though I am never too sure
of having understood the latter.) Such attitudes contrast with the
vanishing images of Christian theology which represented
goodness as almost impossibly difficult, and sin as almost
insuperable and certainly as a universal condition.

=== p. 50 ===

        Yet modern psychology has provided us with what might be
     called a doctrine of original sin, a doctrine which most philosophers either deny (Sartre), ignore (Oxford and Cambridge),
     or attempt to render innocuous (Hampshire). When I speak in
     this context of modern psychology I mean primarily the work of
     Freud. I am not a ‘Freudian’ and the truth of this or that particular view of Freud does not here concern me, but it seems clear
     that Freud made an important discovery about the human mind
     and that he remains still the greatest scientist in the field which
     he opened. One may say that what he presents us with is a
     realistic and detailed picture of the fallen man. If we take the
     general outline of this picture seriously, and at the same time
     wish to do moral philosophy, we shall have to revise the current
     conceptions of will and motive very considerably. What seems
     to me, for these purposes, true and important in Freudian theory
     is as follows. Freud takes a thoroughly pessimistic view of
     human nature. He sees the psyche as an egocentric system of
     quasi-mechanical energy, largely determined by its own
     individual history, whose natural attachments are sexual,
     ambiguous, and hard for the subject to understand or control.
     Introspection reveals only the deep tissue of ambivalent motive,
     and fantasy is a stronger force than reason. Objectivity and
     unselfishness are not natural to human beings.
        Of course Freud is saying these things in the context of a
     scientific therapy which aims not at making people good but at
     making them workable. If a moral philosopher says such things
     he must justify them not with scientific arguments but with
     arguments appropriate to philosophy; and in fact if he does say
     such things he will not be saying anything very new, since partially similar views have been expressed before in philosophy, as
     far back as Plato. It is important to look at Freud and his successors because they can give us more information about a mechanism the general nature of which we may discern without the
     help of science; and also because the ignoring of psychology

=== p. 51 ===

may be a source of confusion. Some philosophers (e.g. Sartre)
regard traditional psycho-analytical theory as a form of determinism and are prepared to deny it at all levels, and philosophers
who ignore it often do so as part of an easy surrender to science
of aspects of the mind which ought to interest them. But determinism as a total philosophical theory is not the enemy. Determinism as a philosophical theory is quite unproven, and it can
be argued that it is not possible in principle to translate propositions about men making decisions and formulating viewpoints
into the neutral languages of natural science. (See Hampshire’s
brief discussion of this point in the last chapter of his book The
Freedom of the Individual.) The problem is to accommodate inside
moral philosophy, and suggest methods of dealing with the fact
that so much of human conduct is moved by mechanical energy
of an egocentric kind. In the moral life the enemy is the fat
relentless ego. Moral philosophy is properly, and in the past has
sometimes been, the discussion of this ego and of the techniques
(if any) for its defeat. In this respect moral philosophy has shared
some aims with religion. To say this is of course also to deny that
moral philosophy should aim at being neutral.
   What is a good man like? How can we make ourselves morally
better? Can we make ourselves morally better? These are questions the philosopher should try to answer. We realize on reflection that we know little about good men. There are men in
history who are traditionally thought of as having been good
(Christ, Socrates, certain saints), but if we try to contemplate
these men we find that the information about them is scanty and
vague, and that, their great moments apart, it is the simplicity
and directness of their diction which chiefly colours our conception of them as good. And if we consider contemporary candidates for goodness, if we know of any, we are likely to find them
obscure or else on closer inspection full of frailty. Goodness
appears to be both rare and hard to picture. It is perhaps most
convincingly met with in simple people—inarticulate, unselfish

=== p. 52 ===

     mothers of large families—but these cases are also the least
     illuminating.
        It is significant that the idea of goodness (and of virtue) has
     been largely superseded in Western moral philosophy by the
     idea of rightness, supported perhaps by some conception of
     sincerity. This is to some extent a natural outcome of the disappearance of a permanent background to human activity: a permanent background, whether provided by God, by Reason, by
     History, or by the self. The agent, thin as a needle, appears in the
     quick flash of the choosing will. Yet existentialism itself, certainly in its French and Anglo-Saxon varieties, has, with a certain
     honesty, made evident the paradoxes of its own assumptions.
     Sartre tells us that when we deliberate the die is already cast, and
     Oxford philosophy has developed no serious theory of motivation. The agent’s freedom, indeed his moral quality, resides in
     his choices, and yet we are not told what prepares him for the
     choices. Sartre can admit, with bravado, that we choose out of
     some sort of pre-existent condition, which he also confusingly
     calls a choice, and Richard Hare holds that the identification of
     mental data, such as ‘intentions’, is philosophically difficult and
     we had better say that a man is morally the set of his actual
     choices. That visible motives do not necessitate acts is taken by
     Sartre as a cue for asserting an irresponsible freedom as an
     obscure postulate; that motives do not readily yield to ‘introspection’ is taken by many British philosophers as an excuse for
     forgetting them and talking about ‘reasons’ instead. These views
     seem both unhelpful to the moral pilgrim and also profoundly
     unrealistic. Moral choice is often a mysterious matter. Kant
     thought so, and he pictured the mystery in terms of an
     indiscernible balance between a pure rational agent and an
     impersonal mechanism, neither of which represented what we
     normally think of as personality; much existentialist philosophy
     is in this respect, though often covertly, Kantian. But should not
     the mystery of choice be conceived of in some other way?

=== p. 53 ===

   We have learned from Freud to picture ‘the mechanism’ as
something highly individual and personal, which is at the same
time very powerful and not easily understood by its owner. The
self of psychoanalysis is certainly substantial enough. The existentialist picture of choice, whether it be surrealist or rational,
seems unrealistic, over-optimistic, romantic, because it ignores
what appears at least to be a sort of continuous background with
a life of its own; and it is surely in the tissue of that life that the
secrets of good and evil are to be found. Here neither the inspiring ideas of freedom, sincerity and fiats of will, nor the plain
wholesome concept of a rational discernment of duty, seem
complex enough to do justice to what we really are. What we
really are seems much more like an obscure system of energy
out of which choices and visible acts of will emerge at intervals
in ways which are often unclear and often dependent on the
condition of the system in between the moments of choice.
   If this is so, one of the main problems of moral philosophy
might be formulated thus: are there any techniques for the purification and reorientation of an energy which is naturally selfish,
in such a way that when moments of choice arrive we shall be
sure of acting rightly? We shall also have to ask whether, if there
are such techniques, they should be simply described, in quasi-psychological terms, perhaps in psychological terms, or whether
they can be spoken of in a more systematic philosophical way. I
have already suggested that a pessimistic view which claims that
goodness is the almost impossible countering of a powerful
egocentric mechanism already exists in traditional philosophy
and in theology. The technique which Plato thought appropriate
to this situation I shall discuss later. Much closer and more familiar to us are the techniques of religion, of which the most widely
practised is prayer. What becomes of such a technique in a world
without God, and can it be transformed to supply at least part of
the answer to our central question?
   Prayer is properly not petition, but simply an attention to God

=== p. 54 ===

     which is a form of love. With it goes the idea of grace, of a
     supernatural assistance to human endeavour which overcomes
     empirical limitations of personality. What is this attention like,
     and can those who are not religious believers still conceive of
     profiting by such an activity? Let us pursue the matter by considering what the traditional object of this attention was like and
     by what means it affected its worshippers. I shall suggest that
     God was (or is) a single perfect transcendent non-representable and necessarily
     real object of attention; and I shall go on to suggest that moral philosophy should attempt to retain a central concept which has all
     these characteristics. I shall consider them one by one, although
     to a large extent they interpenetrate and overlap.
        Let us take first the notion of an object of attention. The
     religious believer, especially if his God is conceived of as a person, is in the fortunate position of being able to focus his
     thought upon something which is a source of energy. Such
     focusing, with such results, is natural to human beings. Consider
     being in love. Consider too the attempt to check being in love,
     and the need in such a case of another object to attend to. Where
     strong emotions of sexual love, or of hatred, resentment, or
     jealousy are concerned, ‘pure will’ can usually achieve little. It is
     small use telling oneself ‘Stop being in love, stop feeling resentment, be just.’ What is needed is a reorientation which will
     provide an energy of a different kind, from a different source.
     Notice the metaphors of orientation and of looking. The neo-Kantian existentialist ‘will’ is a principle of pure movement. But
     how ill this describes what it is like for us to alter. Deliberately
     falling out of love is not a jump of the will, it is the acquiring of
     new objects of attention and thus of new energies as a result of
     refocusing. The metaphor of orientation may indeed also cover
     moments when recognizable ‘efforts of will’ are made, but
     explicit efforts of will are only a part of the whole situation. That
     God, attended to, is a powerful source of (often good) energy is
     a psychological fact. It is also a psychological fact, and one of

=== p. 55 ===

importance in moral philosophy, that we can all receive moral
help by focusing our attention upon things which are valuable:
virtuous people, great art, perhaps (I will discuss this later) the
idea of goodness itself. Human beings are naturally ‘attached’
and when an attachment seems painful or bad it is most readily
displaced by another attachment, which an attempt at attention
can encourage. There is nothing odd or mystical about this, nor
about the fact that our ability to act well ‘when the time comes’
depends partly, perhaps largely, upon the quality of our habitual
objects of attention. ‘Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things
are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things of
good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise,
think on these things.’
   The notion that value should be in some sense unitary, or even
that there should be a single supreme value concept, may seem,
if one surrenders the idea of God, far from obvious. Why should
there not be many different kinds of independent moral values?
Why should all be one here? The madhouses of the world are
filled with people who are convinced that all is one. It might be
said that ‘all is one’ is a dangerous falsehood at any level except
the highest; and can that be discerned at all? That a belief in the
unity, and also in the hierarchical order, of the moral world has a
psychological importance is fairly evident. The notion that ‘it all
somehow must make sense’, or ‘there is a best decision here’,
preserves from despair: the difficulty is how to entertain this
consoling notion in a way which is not false. As soon as any idea
is a consolation the tendency to falsify it becomes strong: hence
the traditional problem of preventing the idea of God from
degenerating in the believer’s mind. It is true that the intellect
naturally seeks unity; and in the sciences, for instance, the
assumption of unity consistently rewards the seeker. But how can
this dangerous idea be used in morals? It is useless to ask ‘ordinary language’ for a judgment, since we are dealing with concepts

=== p. 56 ===

     which are not on display in ordinary language or unambiguously tied up to ordinary words. Ordinary language is not a
     philosopher.
        We might, however, set out from an ordinary language situation by reflecting upon the virtues. The concepts of the virtues,
     and the familiar words which name them, are important since
     they help to make certain potentially nebulous areas of experience more open to inspection. If we reflect upon the nature of
     the virtues we are constantly led to consider their relation to
     each other. The idea of an ‘order’ of virtues suggests itself,
     although it might of course be difficult to state this in any systematic form. For instance, if we reflect upon courage and ask
     why we think it to be a virtue, what kind of courage is the
     highest, what distinguishes courage from rashness, ferocity, self-assertion, and so on, we are bound, in our explanation, to use
     the names of other virtues. The best kind of courage (that which
     would make a man act unselfishly in a concentration camp) is
     steadfast, calm, temperate, intelligent, loving. . . . This may not
     in fact be exactly the right description, but it is the right sort of
     description. Whether there is a single supreme principle in the
     united world of the virtues, and whether the name of that principle is love, is something which I shall discuss below. All I
     suggest here is that reflection rightly tends to unify the moral
     world, and that increasing moral sophistication reveals increasing unity. What is it like to be just? We come to understand this
     as we come to understand the relationship between justice and
     the other virtues. Such a reflection requires and generates a rich
     and diversified vocabulary for naming aspects of goodness. It is a
     shortcoming of much contemporary moral philosophy that it
     eschews discussion of the separate virtues, preferring to proceed
     directly to some sovereign concept such as sincerity, or authenticity, or freedom, thereby imposing, it seems to me, an
     unexamined and empty idea of unity, and impoverishing our
     moral language in an important area.

=== p. 57 ===

   We have spoken of an ‘object of attention’ and of an unavoidable sense of ‘unity’. Let us now go on to consider, thirdly, the
much more difficult idea of ‘transcendence’. All that has been
said so far could be said without benefit of metaphysics. But now
it may be asked: are you speaking of a transcendent authority or
of a psychological device? It seems to me that the idea of the
transcendent, in some form or other, belongs to morality: but it
is not easy to interpret. As with so many of these large elusive
ideas, it readily takes on forms which are false ones. There is a
false transcendence, as there is a false unity, which is generated
by modern empiricism: a transcendence which is in effect
simply an exclusion, a relegation of the moral to a shadowy
existence in terms of emotive language, imperatives, behaviour
patterns, attitudes. ‘Value’ does not belong inside the world of
truth functions, the world of science and factual propositions. So
it must live somewhere else. It is then attached somehow to the
human will, a shadow clinging to a shadow. The result is the sort
of dreary moral solipsism which so many so-called books on
ethics purvey. An instrument for criticizing the false transcendence, in many of its forms, has been given to us by Marx in the
concept of alienation. Is there, however, any true transcendence,
or is this idea always a consoling dream projected by human
need on to an empty sky?
   It is difficult to be exact here. One might start from the assertion that morality, goodness, is a form of realism. The idea of a
really good man living in a private dream world seems unacceptable. Of course a good man may be infinitely eccentric, but he
must know certain things about his surroundings, most obviously the existence of other people and their claims. The chief
enemy of excellence in morality (and also in art) is personal
fantasy: the tissue of self-aggrandizing and consoling wishes and
dreams which prevents one from seeing what is there outside
one. Rilke said of Cézanne that he did not paint ‘I like it’, he
painted ‘There it is.’ This is not easy, and requires, in art or

=== p. 58 ===

     morals, a discipline. One might say here that art is an excellent
     analogy of morals, or indeed that it is in this respect a case of
     morals. We cease to be in order to attend to the existence of
     something else, a natural object, a person in need. We can see in
     mediocre art, where perhaps it is even more clearly seen than in
     mediocre conduct, the intrusion of fantasy, the assertion of self,
     the dimming of any reflection of the real world.
        It may be agreed that the direction of attention should properly be outward, away from self, but it will be said that it is a
     long step from the idea of realism to the idea of transcendence. I
     think, however, that these two ideas are related, and one can see
     their relation particularly in the case of our apprehension of
     beauty. The link here is the concept of indestructibility or incorruptibility. What is truly beautiful is ‘inaccessible’ and cannot be
     possessed or destroyed. The statue is broken, the flower fades,
     the experience ceases, but something has not suffered from
     decay and mortality. Almost anything that consoles us is a fake,
     and it is not easy to prevent this idea from degenerating into a
     vague Shelleyan mysticism. In the case of the idea of a transcendent personal God the degeneration of the idea seems scarcely
     avoidable: theologians are busy at their desks at this very
     moment trying to undo the results of this degeneration. In the
     case of beauty, whether in art or in nature, the sense of separateness from the temporal process is connected perhaps with concepts of perfection of form and ‘authority’ which are not easy to
     transfer into the field of morals. Here I am not sure if this is an
     analogy or an instance. It is as if we can see beauty itself in a way
     in which we cannot see goodness itself. (Plato says this at Phaedrus
     250e.) I can experience the transcendence of the beautiful, but (I
     think) not the transcendence of the good. Beautiful things contain beauty in a way in which good acts do not exactly contain
     good, because beauty is partly a matter of the senses. So if we
     speak of good as transcendent we are speaking of something
     rather more complicated and which cannot be experienced,

=== p. 59 ===

even when we see the unselfish man in the concentration camp.
One might be tempted to use the word ‘faith’ here if it could be
purged of its religious associations. ‘What is truly good is incorruptible and indestructible.’ ‘Goodness is not in this world.’
These sound like highly metaphysical statements. Can we give
them any clear meaning or are they just things one ‘feels
inclined to say’?
   I think the idea of transcendence here connects with two
separate ideas, both of which I will be further concerned with
below perfection and certainty. Are we not certain that there is a ‘true
direction’ towards better conduct, that goodness ‘really matters’,
and does not that certainty about a standard suggest an idea of
permanence which cannot be reduced to psychological or any
other set of empirical terms? It is true, and this connects with
considerations already put forward under the heading of ‘attention’, that there is a psychological power which derives from the
mere idea of a transcendent object, and one might say further
from a transcendent object which is to some extent mysterious.
But a reductive analysis in, for instance, Freudian terms, or Marx-ist terms, seems properly to apply here only to a degenerate form
of a conception about which one remains certain that a higher
and invulnerable form must exist. The idea admittedly remains
very difficult. How is one to connect the realism which must
involve a clear-eyed contemplation of the misery and evil of the
world with a sense of an uncorrupted good without the latter
idea becoming the merest consolatory dream? (I think this puts
a central problem in moral philosophy.) Also, what is it for
someone, who is not a religious believer and not some sort of
mystic, to apprehend some separate ‘form’ of goodness behind
the multifarious cases of good behaviour? Should not this idea
be reduced to the much more intelligible notion of the interrelation of the virtues, plus a purely subjective sense of the certainty
of judgments?
   At this point the hope of answering these questions might

=== p. 60 ===

     lead us on to consider the next, and closely related ‘attributes’:
     perfection (absolute good) and necessary existence. These attributes are
     indeed so closely connected that from some points of view they
     are the same. (Ontological proof.) It may seem curious to wonder whether the idea of perfection (as opposed to the idea of
     merit or improvement) is really an important one, and what sort
     of role it can play. Well, is it important to measure and compare
     things and know just how good they are? In any field which
     interests or concerns us I think we would say yes. A deep understanding of any field of human activity (painting, for instance)
     involves an increasing revelation of degrees of excellence and
     often a revelation of there being in fact little that is very good
     and nothing that is perfect. Increasing understanding of human
     conduct operates in a similar way. We come to perceive scales,
     distances, standards, and may incline to see as less than excellent
     what previously we were prepared to ‘let by’. (This need not of
     course hinder the operation of the virtue of tolerance: tolerance
     can be, indeed ought to be, clear-sighted.) The idea of perfection
     works thus within a field of study, producing an increasing sense
     of direction. To say this is not perhaps to say anything very
     startling; and a reductionist might argue that an increasingly
     refined ability to compare need not imply anything beyond
     itself. The idea of perfection might be, as it were, empty.
        Let us consider the case of conduct. What of the command ‘Be
     ye therefore perfect?’ Would it not be more sensible to say ‘Be ye
     therefore slightly improved?’ Some psychologists warn us that if
     our standards are too high we shall become neurotic. It seems to
     me that the idea of love arises necessarily in this context. The
     idea of perfection moves, and possibly changes, us (as artist,
     worker, agent) because it inspires love in the part of us that is
     most worthy. One cannot feel unmixed love for a mediocre
     moral standard any more than one can for the work of a mediocre artist. The idea of perfection is also a natural producer of
     order. In its light we come to see that A, which superficially

=== p. 61 ===

resembles B, is really better than B. And this can occur, indeed
must occur, without our having the sovereign idea in any sense
‘taped’. In fact it is in its nature that we cannot get it taped. This
is the true sense of the ‘indefinability’ of the good; which was
given a vulgar sense by Moore and his followers. It lies always
beyond, and it is from this beyond that it exercises its authority.
Here again the word seems naturally in place, and it is in the
work of artists that we see the operation most clearly. The true
artist is obedient to a conception of perfection to which his work
is constantly related and re-related in what seems an external
manner. One may of course try to ‘incarnate’ the idea of perfection by saying to oneself ‘I want to write like Shakespeare’ or ‘I
want to paint like Piero’. But of course one knows that Shake-speare and Piero, though almost gods, are not gods, and that one
has got to do the thing oneself alone and differently, and that
beyond the details of craft and criticism there is only the magnetic non-representable idea of the good which remains not
‘empty’ so much as mysterious. And thus too in the sphere of
human conduct.
   It will be said perhaps: are these not simply empirical generalizations about the psychology of effort or improvement, or what
status do you wish them to have? Is it just a matter of ‘this works’
or ‘it is as if this were so’? Let us consider what, if our subject of
discussion were not Good but God, the reply might be. God
exists necessarily. Everything else which exists exists contingently.
What can this mean? I am assuming that there is no plausible
‘proof ’ of the existence of God except some form of the ontological proof, a ‘proof ’ incidentally which must now take on an
increased importance in theology as a result of the recent ‘demythologizing’. If considered carefully, however, the ontological
proof is seen to be not exactly a proof but rather a clear assertion
of faith (it is often admitted to be appropriate only for those
already convinced), which could only confidently be made on
the basis of a certain amount of experience. This assertion could

=== p. 62 ===

     be put in various ways. The desire for God is certain to receive a
     response. My conception of God contains the certainty of its
     own reality. God is an object of love which uniquely excludes
     doubt and relativism. Such obscure statements would of course
     receive little sympathy from analytical philosophers, who would
     divide their content between psychological fact and metaphysical nonsense, and who might remark that one might just as
     well take ‘I know that my Redeemer liveth’, as asserted by Handel,
     as a philosophical argument. Whether they are right about ‘God’
     I leave aside: but what about the fate of ‘Good’? The difficulties
     seem similar. What status can we give to the idea of certainty
     which does seem to attach itself to the idea of good? Or to the
     notion that we must receive a return when good is sincerely
     desired? (The concept of grace can be readily secularized.) What
     is formulated here seems unlike an ‘as if ’ or a ‘it works’. Of
     course one must avoid here, as in the case of God, any heavy
     material connotation of the misleading word ‘exist’. Equally,
     however, a purely subjective conviction of certainty, which
     could receive a ready psychological explanation, seems less than
     enough. Could the problem really be subdivided without residue by a careful linguistic analyst into parts which he would
     deem innocuous?
        A little light may be thrown on the matter if we return now,
     after the intervening discussion, to the idea of ‘realism’ which was
     used earlier in a normative sense: that is, it was assumed that it
     was better to know what was real than to be in a state of fantasy
     or illusion. It is true that human beings cannot bear much reality; and a consideration of what the effort to face reality is like,
     and what are its techniques, may serve both to illuminate the
     necessity or certainty which seems to attach to ‘the Good’; and
     also to lead on to a reinterpretation of ‘will’ and ‘freedom’ in
     relation to the concept of love. Here again it seems to me that art
     is the clue. Art presents the most comprehensible examples of
     the almost irresistible human tendency to seek consolation in

=== p. 63 ===

fantasy and also of the effort to resist this and the vision of reality
which comes with success. Success in fact is rare. Almost all art is
a form of fantasy-consolation and few artists achieve the vision
of the real. The talent of the artist can be readily, and is naturally,
employed to produce a picture whose purpose is the consolation
and aggrandizement of its author and the projection of his personal obsessions and wishes. To silence and expel self, to contemplate and delineate nature with a clear eye, is not easy and
demands a moral discipline. A great artist is, in respect of his
work, a good man, and, in the true sense, a free man. The consumer of art has an analogous task to its producer: to be disciplined enough to see as much reality in the work as the artist has
succeeded in putting into it, and not to ‘use it as magic’. The
appreciation of beauty in art or nature is not only (for all its
difficulties) the easiest available spiritual exercise; it is also a
completely adequate entry into (and not just analogy of ) the
good life, since it is the checking of selfishness in the interest of
seeing the real. Of course great artists are ‘personalities’ and have
special styles; even Shakespeare occasionally, though very
occasionally, reveals a personal obsession. But the greatest art is
‘impersonal’ because it shows us the world, our world and not
another one, with a clarity which startles and delights us simply
because we are not used to looking at the real world at all. Of
course, too, artists are pattern-makers. The claims of form and
the question of ‘how much form’ to elicit constitutes one of the
chief problems of art. But it is when form is used to isolate, to
explore, to display something which is true that we are most
highly moved and enlightened. Plato says (Republic, VII, 532) that
the technai have the power to lead the best part of the soul to the
view of what is most excellent in reality. This well describes the
role of great art as an educator and revealer. Consider what we
learn from contemplating the characters of Shakespeare or
Tolstoy or the paintings of Velasquez or Titian. What is learnt
here is something about the real quality of human nature, when

=== p. 64 ===

     it is envisaged, in the artist’s just and compassionate vision, with
     a clarity which does not belong to the self-centred rush of
     ordinary life.
         It is important too that great art teaches us how real things can
     be looked at and loved without being seized and used, without
     being appropriated into the greedy organism of the self. This
     exercise of detachment is difficult and valuable whether the thing
     contemplated is a human being or the root of a tree or the
     vibration of a colour or a sound. Unsentimental contemplation
     of nature exhibits the same quality of detachment: selfish concerns vanish, nothing exists except the things which are seen.
     Beauty is that which attracts this particular sort of unselfish
     attention. It is obvious here what is the role, for the artist or
     spectator, of exactness and good vision: unsentimental,
     detached, unselfish, objective attention. It is also clear that in
     moral situations a similar exactness is called for. I would suggest
     that the authority of the Good seems to us something necessary
     because the realism (ability to perceive reality) required for
     goodness is a kind of intellectual ability to perceive what is true,
     which is automatically at the same time a suppression of self. The
     necessity of the good is then an aspect of the kind of necessity involved in any
     technique for exhibiting fact. In thus treating realism, whether of artist
     or of agent, as a moral achievement, there is of course a further
     assumption to be made in the fields of morals: that true vision
     occasions right conduct. This could be uttered simply as an
     enlightening tautology: but I think it can in fact be supported by
     appeals to experience. The more the separateness and differentness of other people is realized, and the fact seen that another
     man has needs and wishes as demanding as one’s own, the
     harder it becomes to treat a person as a thing. That it is realism
     which makes great art great remains too as a kind of proof.
         If, still led by the clue of art, we ask further questions about
     the faculty which is supposed to relate us to what is real and thus
     bring us to what is good, the idea of compassion or love will be

=== p. 65 ===

naturally suggested. It is not simply that suppression of self is
required before accurate vision can be obtained. The great artist
sees his objects (and this is true whether they are sad, absurd,
repulsive or even evil) in a light of justice and mercy. The direction of attention is, contrary to nature, outward, away from self
which reduces all to a false unity, towards the great surprising
variety of the world, and the ability so to direct attention is love.
   One might at this point pause and consider the picture of
human personality, or the soul, which has been emerging. It is in
the capacity to love, that is to see, that the liberation of the soul
from fantasy consists. The freedom which is a proper human
goal is the freedom from fantasy, that is the realism of compassion. What I have called fantasy, the proliferation of blinding
self-centred aims and images, is itself a powerful system of
energy, and most of what is often called ‘will’ or ‘willing’
belongs to this system. What counteracts the system is attention
to reality inspired by, consisting of, love. In the case of art and
nature such attention is immediately rewarded by the enjoyment
of beauty. In the case of morality, although there are sometimes
rewards, the idea of a reward is out of place. Freedom is not
strictly the exercise of the will, but rather the experience of
accurate vision which, when this becomes appropriate, occasions action. It is what lies behind and in between actions and
prompts them that is important, and it is this area which should
be purified. By the time the moment of choice has arrived the
quality of attention has probably determined the nature of the
act. This fact produces that curious separation between consciously rehearsed motives and action which is sometimes
wrongly taken as an experience of freedom. (Angst.) Of course
this is not to say that good ‘efforts of will’ are always useless or
always fakes. Explicit and immediate ‘willing’ can play some
part, especially as an inhibiting factor. (The daemon of Socrates
only told him what not to do.)
   In such a picture sincerity and self-knowledge, those popular

=== p. 66 ===

     merits, seem less important. It is an attachment to what lies
     outside the fantasy mechanism, and not a scrutiny of the mechanism itself, that liberates. Close scrutiny of the mechanism often
     merely strengthens its power. ‘Self-knowledge’, in the sense of a
     minute understanding of one’s own machinery, seems to me,
     except at a fairly simple level, usually a delusion. A sense of such
     self-knowledge may of course be induced in analysis for therapeutic reasons, but ‘the cure’ does not prove the alleged knowledge genuine. Self is as hard to see justly as other things, and
     when clear vision has been achieved, self is a correspondingly
     smaller and less interesting object. A chief enemy to such clarity
     of vision, whether in art or morals, is the system to which the
     technical name of sado-masochism has been given. It is the
     peculiar subtlety of this system that, while constantly leading
     attention and energy back into the self, it can produce, almost all
     the way as it were to the summit, plausible imitations of what is
     good. Refined sado-masochism can ruin art which is too good
     to be ruined by the cruder vulgarities of self-indulgence. One’s
     self is interesting, so one’s motives are interesting, and the
     unworthiness of one’s motives is interesting. Fascinating too is
     the alleged relation of master to slave, of the good self to the bad
     self which, oddly enough, ends in such curious compromises.
     (Kafka’s struggle with the devil which ends up in bed.) The bad
     self is prepared to suffer but not to obey until the two selves are
     friends and obedience has become reasonably easy or at least
     amusing. In reality the good self is very small indeed, and most
     of what appears good is not. The truly good is not a friendly
     tyrant to the bad, it is its deadly foe. Even suffering itself can play
     a demonic role here, and the ideas of guilt and punishment can
     be the most subtle tool of the ingenious self. The idea of suffering confuses the mind and in certain contexts (the context of
     ‘sincere self-examination’ for instance) can masquerade as a
     purification. It is rarely this, for unless it is very intense indeed it
     is far too interesting. Plato does not say that philosophy is the

=== p. 67 ===

study of suffering, he says it is the study of death (Phaedo 64a),
and these ideas are totally dissimilar. That moral improvement
involves suffering is usually true; but the suffering is the byproduct of a new orientation and not in any sense an end in
itself.
   I have spoken of the real which is the proper object of love,
and of knowledge which is freedom. The word ‘good’ which
has been moving about in the discussion should now be more
explicitly considered. Can good itself be in any sense ‘an object
of attention’? And how does this problem relate to ‘love of the
real’? Is there, as it were, a substitute for prayer, that most profound and effective of religious techniques? If the energy and
violence of will, exerted on occasions of choice, seems less
important than the quality of attention which determines our
real attachments, how do we alter and purify that attention and
make it more realistic? Is the via negativa of the will, its occasional
ability to stop a bad move, the only or most considerable conscious power that we can exert? I think there is something
analogous to prayer, though it is something difficult to describe,
and which the higher subtleties of the self can often falsify; I am
not here thinking of any quasi-religious meditative technique,
but of something which belongs to the moral life of the ordinary person. The idea of contemplation is hard to understand and
maintain in a world increasingly without sacraments and ritual
and in which philosophy has (in many respects rightly) destroyed the old substantial conception of the self. A sacrament
provides an external visible place for an internal invisible act of
the spirit. Perhaps one needs too an analogy of the concept of the
sacrament, though this must be treated with great caution.
Behaviouristic ethics denies the importance, because it questions
the identity, of anything prior to or apart from action which
decisively occurs, ‘in the mind’. The apprehension of beauty, in
art or in nature, often in fact seems to us like a temporally
located spiritual experience which is a source of good energy. It

=== p. 68 ===

     is not easy, however, to extend the idea of such an influential
     experience to occasions of thinking about people or action, since
     clarity of thought and purity of attention become harder and
     more ambiguous when the object of attention is something
     moral.
        It is here that it seems to me to be important to retain the idea
     of Good as a central point of reflection, and here too we may see
     the significance of its indefinable and non-representable character. Good, not will is transcendent. Will is the natural energy of the
     psyche which is sometimes employable for a worthy purpose.
     Good is the focus of attention when an intent to be virtuous coexists (as perhaps it almost always does) with some unclarity of
     vision. Here, as I have said earlier, beauty appears as the visible
     and accessible aspect of the Good. The Good itself is not visible.
     Plato pictured the good man as eventually able to look at the sun.
     I have never been sure what to make of this part of the myth.
     While it seems proper to represent the Good as a centre or focus
     of attention, yet it cannot quite be thought of as a ‘visible’ one in
     that it cannot be experienced or represented or defined. We can
     certainly know more or less where the sun is; it is not so easy to
     imagine what it would be like to look at it. Perhaps indeed only
     the good man knows what this is like; or perhaps to look at the
     sun is to be gloriously dazzled and to see nothing. What does
     seem to make perfect sense in the Platonic myth is the idea of the
     Good as the source of light which reveals to us all things as they
     really are. All just vision, even in the strictest problems of the
     intellect, and a fortiori when suffering or wickedness have to be
     perceived, is a moral matter. The same virtues, in the end the
     same virtue (love), are required throughout, and fantasy (self )
     can prevent us from seeing a blade of grass just as it can prevent
     us from seeing another person. An increasing awareness of
     ‘goods’ and the attempt (usually only partially successful) to
     attend to them purely, without self, brings with it an increasing
     awareness of the unity and interdependence of the moral

=== p. 69 ===

world. One-seeking intelligence is the image of ‘faith’. Consider
what it is like to increase one’s understanding of a great work
of art.
   I think it is more than a verbal point to say that what should be
aimed at is goodness, and not freedom or right action, although
right action, and freedom in the sense of humility, are the natural products of attention to the Good. Of course right action is
important in itself, with an importance which is not difficult to
understand. But it should provide the starting-point of reflection
and not its conclusion. Right action, together with the steady
extension of the area of strict obligation, is a proper criterion of
virtue. Action also tends to confirm, for better or worse, the
background of attachment from which it issues. Action is an
occasion for grace, or for its opposite. However, the aim of morality cannot be simply action. Without some more positive conception of the soul as a substantial and continually developing
mechanism of attachments, the purification and reorientation of
which must be the task of morals, ‘freedom’ is readily corrupted
into self-assertion and ‘right action’ into some sort of ad hoc
utilitarianism. If a scientifically minded empiricism is not to
swallow up the study of ethics completely, philosophers must
try to invent a terminology which shows how our natural
psychology can be altered by conceptions which lie beyond its
range. It seems to me that the Platonic metaphor of the idea of
the Good provides a suitable picture here. With this picture must
of course be joined a realistic conception of natural psychology
(about which almost all philosophers seem to me to have been
too optimistic) and also an acceptance of the utter lack of finality
in human life. The Good has nothing to do with purpose, indeed
it excludes the idea of purpose. ‘All is vanity’ is the beginning
and the end of ethics. The only genuine way to be good is to be
good ‘for nothing’ in the midst of a scene where every ‘natural’
thing, including one’s own mind, is subject to chance, that is, to
necessity. That ‘for nothing’ is indeed the experienced correlate

=== p. 70 ===

     of the invisibility or non-representable blankness of the idea of
     Good itself.
        I have suggested that moral philosophy needs a new and, to
     my mind, more realistic, less romantic, terminology if it is to
     rescue thought about human destiny from a scientifically
     minded empiricism which is not equipped to deal with the real
     problems. Linguistic philosophy has already begun to join hands
     with such an empiricism, and most existentialist thinking seems
     to me either optimistic romancing or else something positively
     Luciferian. (Possibly Heidegger is Lucifer in person.) However,
     at this point someone might say, all this is very well, the only
     difficulty is that none of it is true. Perhaps indeed all is vanity, all
     is vanity, and there is no respectable intellectual way of protecting people from despair. The world just is hopelessly evil and
     should you, who speak of realism, not go all the way towards
     being realistic about this? To speak of Good in this portentous
     manner is simply to speak of the old concept of God in a thin
     disguise. But at least ‘God’ could play a real consoling and
     encouraging role. It makes sense to speak of loving God, a person, but very little sense to speak of loving Good, a concept.
     ‘Good’ even as a fiction is not likely to inspire, or even be comprehensible to, more than a small number of mystically minded
     people who, being reluctant to surrender ‘God’, fake up ‘Good’
     in his image, so as to preserve some kind of hope. The picture is
     not only purely imaginary, it is not even likely to be effective. It
     is very much better to rely on simple popular utilitarian and
     existentialist ideas, together with a little empirical psychology,
     and perhaps some doctored Marxism, to keep the human race
     going. Day-to-day empirical common sense must have the last
     word. All specialized ethical vocabularies are false. The old
     serious metaphysical quest had better now be let go, together
     with the out-dated concept of God the Father.
        I am often more than half persuaded to think in these terms
     myself. It is frequently difficult in philosophy to tell whether one

=== p. 71 ===

is saying something reasonably public and objective, or whether
one is merely erecting a barrier, special to one’s own temperament, against one’s own personal fears. (It is always a significant
question to ask about any philosopher: what is he afraid of?) Of
course one is afraid that the attempt to be good may turn out to
be meaningless, or at best something vague and not very
important, or turn out to be as Nietzsche described it, or that the
greatness of great art may be an ephemeral illusion. Of the ‘status’ of my arguments I will speak briefly below. That a glance at
the scene prompts despair is certainly the case. The difficulty
indeed is to look at all. If one does not believe in a personal God
there is no ‘problem’ of evil, but there is the almost insuperable
difficulty of looking properly at evil and human suffering. It is
very difficult to concentrate attention upon suffering and sin, in
others or in oneself, without falsifying the picture in some way
while making it bearable. (For instance, by the sado-masochistic
devices I mentioned earlier.) Only the very greatest art can manage it, and that is the only public evidence that it can be done at
all. Kant’s notion of the sublime, though extremely interesting,
possibly even more interesting than Kant realized, is a kind of
romanticism. The spectacle of huge and appalling things can
indeed exhilarate, but usually in a way that is less than excellent.
Much existentialist thought relies upon such a ‘thinking reed’
reaction which is nothing more than a form of romantic self-assertion. It is not this which will lead a man on to unselfish
behaviour in the concentration camp. There is, however, something in the serious attempt to look compassionately at human
things which automatically suggests that ‘there is more than
this’. The ‘there is more than this’, if it is not to be corrupted by
some sort of quasi-theological finality, must remain a very tiny
spark of insight, something with, as it were, a metaphysical position but no metaphysical form. But it seems to me that the spark
is real, and that great art is evidence of its reality. Art indeed, so
far from being a playful diversion of the human race, is the place

=== p. 72 ===

     of its most fundamental insight, and the centre to which the
     more uncertain steps of metaphysics must constantly return.
        As for the élite of mystics, I would say no to the term ‘élite’.
     Of course philosophy has its own terminology, but what it
     attempts to describe need not be, and I think is not in this case,
     removed from ordinary life. Morality has always been connected
     with religion and religion with mysticism. The disappearance of
     the middle term leaves morality in a situation which is certainly
     more difficult but essentially the same. The background to
     morals is properly some sort of mysticism, if by this is meant a
     non-dogmatic essentially un-formulated faith in the reality of
     the Good, occasionally connected with experience. The virtuous
     peasant knows, and I believe he will go on knowing, in spite of
     the removal or modification of the theological apparatus,
     although what he knows he might be at a loss to say. This view is
     of course not amenable even to a persuasive philosophical proof
     and can easily be challenged on all sorts of empirical grounds.
     However, I do not think that the virtuous peasant will be without
     resources. Traditional Christian superstition has been compatible
     with every sort of conduct from bad to good. There will doubtless be new superstitions; and it will remain the case that some
     people will manage effectively to love their neighbours. I think
     the ‘machinery of salvation’ (if it exists) is essentially the same
     for all. There is no complicated secret doctrine. We are all capable
     of criticizing, modifying and extending the area of strict obligation which we have inherited. Good is non-representable and
     indefinable. We are all mortal and equally at the mercy of necessity and chance. These are the true aspects in which all men are
     brothers.
        On the status of the argument there is perhaps little, or else
     too much, to say. In so far as there is an argument it has already,
     in a compressed way, occurred. Philosophical argument is
     almost always inconclusive, and this one is not of the most rigorous kind. This is not a sort of pragmatism or a philosophy of

=== p. 73 ===

‘as if ’. If someone says, ‘Do you then believe that the Idea of the
Good exists?’ I reply, ‘No, not as people used to think that God
existed.’ All one can do is to appeal to certain areas of experience
pointing out certain features, and using suitable metaphors and
inventing suitable concepts where necessary to make these features visible. No more, and no less, than this is done by the most
empirically minded of linguistic philosophers. As there is no
philosophical or scientific proof of total determinism the notion
is at least allowable that there is a part of the soul which is free
from the mechanism of empirical psychology. I would wish to
combine the assertion of such a freedom with a strict and largely
empirical view of the mechanism itself. Of the very small area of
‘freedom’, that in us which attends to the real and is attracted by
the good, I would wish to give an equally rigorous and perhaps
pessimistic account.
   I have not spoken of the role of love in its everyday manifestations. If one is going to speak of great art as ‘evidence’, is not
ordinary human love an even more striking evidence of a transcendent principle of good? Plato was prepared to take it as a
starting-point. (There are several starting-points.) One cannot
but agree that in some sense this is the most important thing of
all; and yet human love is normally too profoundly possessive
and also too ‘mechanical’ to be a place of vision. There is a
paradox here about the nature of love itself. That the highest love
is in some sense impersonal is something which we can
indeed see in art, but which I think we cannot see clearly,
except in a very piecemeal manner, in the relationships of
human beings. Once again the place of art is unique. The
image of the Good as a transcendent magnetic centre seems to
me the least corruptible and most realistic picture for us to use
in our reflections upon the moral life. Here the philosophical
‘proof ’, if there is one, is the same as the moral ‘proof ’. I
would rely especially upon arguments from experience concerned with the realism which we perceive to be connected

=== p. 74 ===

     with goodness, and with the love and detachment which is
     exhibited in great art.
        I have throughout this paper assumed that ‘there is no God’
     and that the influence of religion is waning rapidly. Both these
     assumptions may be challenged. What seems beyond doubt is
     that moral philosophy is daunted and confused, and in many
     quarters discredited and regarded as unnecessary. The vanishing
     of the philosophical self, together with the confident filling in of
     the scientific self, has led in ethics to an inflated and yet empty
     conception of the will, and it is this that I have been chiefly
     attacking. I am not sure how far my positive suggestions make
     sense. The search for unity is deeply natural, but like so many
     things which are deeply natural may be capable of producing
     nothing but a variety of illusions. What I feel sure of is the
     inadequacy, indeed the inaccuracy, of utilitarianism, linguistic
     behaviourism, and current existentialism in any of the forms
     with which I am familiar. I also feel sure that moral philosophy
     ought to be defended and kept in existence as a pure activity, or
     fertile area, analogous in importance to unapplied mathematics
     or pure ‘useless’ historical research. Ethical theory has affected
     society, and has reached as far as to the ordinary man, in the
     past, and there is no good reason to think that it cannot do so in
     the future. For both the collective and the individual salvation of
     the human race, art is doubtless more important than philosophy, and literature most important of all. But there can be no
     substitute for pure, disciplined, professional speculation: and it
     is from these two areas, art and ethics, that we must hope to
     generate concepts worthy, and also able, to guide and check the
     increasing power of science.

