=== chunk: murdoch-1970-sovereignty-of-good/ch3-sovereignty-of-good ===
title: The Sovereignty of Good Over Other Concepts
source_pdf: docs/sources/murdoch-1970-sovereignty-of-good/full.pdf
pdf_pages: 94-120
page_scheme: book
plan_page_start: 75
plan_page_end: 101
extraction: pdftotext -layout, post-processed (ligature-normalize, dehyphenate via hunspell en_US-large, page-markers, header-strip)

=== p. 75 ===

  THE SOVEREIGNTY OF GOOD
    OVER OTHER CONCEPTS

The development of consciousness in human beings is inseparably connected with the use of metaphor. Metaphors are not
merely peripheral decorations or even useful models, they are
fundamental forms of our awareness of our condition: metaphors of space, metaphors of movement, metaphors of vision.
Philosophy in general, and moral philosophy in particular, has in
the past often concerned itself with what it took to be our most
important images, clarifying existing ones and developing
new ones. Philosophical argument which consists of such
image-play, I mean the great metaphysical systems, is usually
inconclusive, and is regarded by many contemporary thinkers as
valueless. The status and merit of this type of argument raises, of
course, many problems. However, it seems to me impossible to
discuss certain kinds of concepts without resort to metaphor,
since the concepts are themselves deeply metaphorical and cannot be analysed into non-metaphorical components without a
loss of substance. Modern behaviouristic philosophy attempts

=== p. 76 ===

     such an analysis in the case of certain moral concepts, it seems to
     me without success. One of the motives of the attempt is a wish
     to ‘neutralize’ moral philosophy, to produce a philosophical discussion of morality which does not take sides. Metaphors often
     carry a moral charge, which analysis in simpler and plainer
     terms is designed to remove. This too seems to me to be misguided. Moral philosophy cannot avoid taking sides, and would-be neutral philosophers merely take sides surreptitiously. Moral
     philosophy is the examination of the most important of all
     human activities, and I think that two things are required of it.
     The examination should be realistic. Human nature, as opposed
     to the natures of other hypothetical spiritual beings, has certain
     discoverable attributes, and these should be suitably considered
     in any discussion of morality. Secondly, since an ethical system
     cannot but commend an ideal, it should commend a worthy
     ideal. Ethics should not be merely an analysis of ordinary mediocre conduct, it should be a hypothesis about good conduct and
     about how this can be achieved. How can we make ourselves
     better? is a question moral philosophers should attempt to
     answer. And if I am right the answer will come partly at least in
     the form of explanatory and persuasive metaphors. The metaphors which I myself favour and the philosopher under whose
     banner I am fighting I will make clear shortly.
        First, however, I wish to mention very briefly two fundamental assumptions of my argument. If either of these is denied
     what follows will be less convincing. I assume that human beings
     are naturally selfish and that human life has no external point or
     τλο. That human beings are naturally selfish seems true on the
     evidence, whenever and wherever we look at them, in spite of a
     very small number of apparent exceptions. About the quality of
     this selfishness modern psychology has had something to tell us.
     The psyche is a historically determined individual relentlessly
     looking after itself. In some ways it resembles a machine; in
     order to operate it needs sources of energy, and it is predisposed

=== p. 77 ===

to certain patterns of activity. The area of its vaunted freedom of
choice is not usually very great. One of its main pastimes is
daydreaming. It is reluctant to face unpleasant realities. Its consciousness is not normally a transparent glass through which it
views the world, but a cloud of more or less fantastic reverie
designed to protect the psyche from pain. It constantly seeks
consolation, either through imagined inflation of self or through
fictions of a theological nature. Even its loving is more often than
not an assertion of self. I think we can probably recognize
ourselves in this rather depressing description.
   That human life has no external point or τλο is a view as
difficult to argue as its opposite, and I shall simply assert it. I can
see no evidence to suggest that human life is not something self-contained. There are properly many patterns and purposes
within life, but there is no general and as it were externally
guaranteed pattern or purpose of the kind for which philosophers and theologians used to search. We are what we seem to
be, transient mortal creatures subject to necessity and chance.
This is to say that there is, in my view, no God in the traditional
sense of that term; and the traditional sense is perhaps the only
sense. When Bonhoeffer says that God wants us to live as if there
were no God I suspect he is misusing words. Equally the various
metaphysical substitutes for God—Reason, Science, History—
are false deities. Our destiny can be examined but it cannot be
justified or totally explained. We are simply here. And if there
is any kind of sense or unity in human life, and the dream of
this does not cease to haunt us, it is of some other kind and
must be sought within a human experience which has nothing
outside it.
   The idea of life as self-enclosed and purposeless is of course
not simply a product of the despair of our own age. It is the
natural product of the advance of science and has developed over
a long period. It has already in fact occasioned a whole era in the
history of philosophy, beginning with Kant and leading on to

=== p. 78 ===

     the existentialism and the analytic philosophy of the present day.
     The chief characteristic of this phase of philosophy can be
     briefly stated: Kant abolished God and made man God in His
     stead. We are still living in the age of the Kantian man, or Kantian
     man-god. Kant’s conclusive exposure of the so-called proofs of
     the existence of God, his analysis of the limitations of speculative
     reason, together with his eloquent portrayal of the dignity of
     rational man, has had results which might possibly dismay him.
     How recognizable, how familiar to us, is the man so beautifully
     portrayed in the Grundlegung, who confronted even with Christ
     turns away to consider the judgment of his own conscience and
     to hear the voice of his own reason. Stripped of the exiguous
     metaphysical background which Kant was prepared to allow
     him, this man is with us still, free, independent, lonely, powerful, rational, responsible, brave, the hero of so many novels and
     books of moral philosophy. The raison d’être of this attractive but
     misleading creature is not far to seek. He is the offspring of the
     age of science, confidently rational and yet increasingly aware of
     his alienation from the material universe which his discoveries
     reveal; and since he is not a Hegelian (Kant, not Hegel, has
     provided Western ethics with its dominating image) his alienation is without cure. He is the ideal citizen of the liberal state, a
     warning held up to tyrants. He has the virtue which the age
     requires and admires, courage. It is not such a very long step
     from Kant to Nietzsche, and from Nietzsche to existentialism
     and the Anglo-Saxon ethical doctrines which in some ways
     closely resemble it. In fact Kant’s man had already received a
     glorious incarnation nearly a century earlier in the work of
     Milton: his proper name is Lucifer.
        The centre of this type of post-Kantian moral philosophy is
     the notion of the will as the creator of value. Values which were
     previously in some sense inscribed in the heavens and guaranteed by God collapse into the human will. There is no transcendent reality. The idea of the good remains indefinable and empty

=== p. 79 ===

so that human choice may fill it. The sovereign moral concept is
freedom, or possibly courage in a sense which identifies it with
freedom, will, power. This concept inhabits a quite separate top
level of human activity since it is the guarantor of the secondary
values created by choice. Act, choice, decision, responsibility,
independence are emphasized in this philosophy of puritanical
origin and apparent austerity. It must be said in its favour that
this image of human nature has been the inspiration of political
liberalism. However, as Hume once wisely observed, good
political philosophy is not necessarily good moral philosophy.
   This impression is indeed an austere one, but there is something still to be added to it. What place, one might ask, is left in
this stern picture of solitary all-responsible man for the life of
the emotions? In fact the emotions have a rather significant
place. They enter through a back door left open by Kant and the
whole romantic movement has followed after. Puritanism and
romanticism are natural partners and we are still living with
their partnership. Kant held a very interesting theory about the
relation of the emotions to the reason. He did not officially
recognize the emotions as part of the structure of morality.
When he speaks of love he tells us to distinguish between practical love which is a matter of rational actions, and pathological
love which is a mere matter of feeling. He wants to segregate the
messy warm empirical psyche from the clean operations of the
reason. However, in a footnote in the Grundlegung he allows a
subordinate place to a particular emotion, that of Achtung, or
respect for the moral law. This emotion is a kind of suffering
pride which accompanies, though it does not motivate, the
recognition of duty. It is an actual experience of freedom (akin
to the existentialist Angst), the realization that although swayed
by passions we are also capable of rational conduct. A close
relation of this concept is Kant’s handsome conception of the
Sublime. We experience the Sublime when we confront the
awful contingency of nature or of human fate and return into

=== p. 80 ===

     ourselves with a proud shudder of rational power. How abject
     we are, and yet our consciousness is of an infinite value. Here it
     is Belial not Satan who speaks.

                              For who would lose,
         Though full of pain, this intellectual being,
         Those thoughts that wander through eternity . . .

     The emotions are allowed to return to the scene as a kind of
     allowable, rather painful, thrill which is a by-product of our
     status as dignified rational beings.
        What appears in Kant as a footnote and a side-issue takes,
     however, a central place in the development which his philosophy underwent in the romantic movement. I would sum this
     up by saying that romanticism tended to transform the idea of
     death into the idea of suffering. To do this is of course an age-old
     human temptation. Few ideas invented by humanity have more
     power to console than the idea of purgatory. To buy back evil
     by suffering in the embrace of good: what could be more
     satisfying, or as a romantic might say, more thrilling? Indeed the
     central image of Christianity lends itself just this illegitimate
     transformation. The Imitatio Christi in the later work of Kierke-gaard is a distinguished instance of romantic self-indulgence on
     this theme, though it may seem unkind to say this of a great and
     most endearing writer who really did suffer for telling his society some truths. The idea of a rather exciting suffering freedom
     soon began to enliven the austerity of the puritan half of the
     Kantian picture, and with this went a taming and beautifying of
     the idea of death, a cult of pseudo-death and pseudo-transience.
     Death becomes Liebestod, painful and exhilarating, or at worst
     charming and sweetly tearful. I speak here of course, not of the
     great romantic artists and thinkers at their best, but of the
     general beaten track which leads from Kant to the popular
     philosophies of the present day. When the neo-Kantian Lucifer

=== p. 81 ===

gets a glimpse of real death and real chance he takes refuge in
sublime emotions and veils with an image of tortured freedom
that which has been rightly said to be the proper study of
philosophers.
   When Kant wanted to find something clean and pure outside
the mess of the selfish empirical psyche he followed a sound
instinct but, in my view, looked in the wrong place. His inquiry
led him back again into the self, now pictured as angelic, and
inside this angel-self his followers have tended to remain. I want
now to return to the beginning and look again at the powerful
energy system of the self-defensive psyche in the light of the
question, How can we make ourselves better? With such an
opponent to deal with one may doubt whether the idea of the
proud, naked will directed towards right action is a realistic and
sufficient formula. I think that the ordinary man, with the simple
religious conceptions which make sense for him, has usually
held a more just view of the matter than the voluntaristic
philosopher, and a view incidentally which is in better accord
with the findings of modern psychology. Religion normally
emphasizes states of mind as well as actions, and regards states of
mind as the genetic background of action: pureness of heart,
meekness of spirit. Religion provides devices for the purification
of states of mind. The believer feels that he needs, and can
receive, extra help. ‘Not I, but Christ.’ The real existence of such
help is often used as an argument for the truth of religious
doctrines. Of course prayer and sacraments may be ‘misused’ by
the believer as mere instruments of consolation. But, whatever
one thinks of its theological context, it does seem that prayer can
actually induce a better quality of consciousness and provide an
energy for good action which would not otherwise be available.
Modern psychology here supports the ordinary person’s, or
ordinary believer’s, instinctive sense of the importance of his
states of mind and the availability of supplementary energy.
Psychology might indeed prompt contemporary behaviouristic

=== p. 82 ===

     philosophers to re-examine their discarded concepts of ‘experience’ and ‘consciousness’. By opening our eyes we do not necessarily see what confronts us. We are anxiety-ridden animals. Our
     minds are continually active, fabricating an anxious, usually self-preoccupied, often falsifying veil which partially conceals the
     world. Our states of consciousness differ in quality, our fantasies
     and reveries are not trivial and unimportant, they are profoundly
     connected with our energies and our ability to choose and act.
     And if quality of consciousness matters, then anything which
     alters consciousness in the direction of unselfishness, objectivity
     and realism is to be connected with virtue.
        Following a hint in Plato (Phaedrus 250) I shall start by speaking of what is perhaps the most obvious thing in our surroundings which is an occasion for ‘unselfing’, and that is what is
     popularly called beauty. Recent philosophers tend to avoid this
     term because they prefer to talk of reasons rather than of experiences. But the implication of experience with beauty seems to
     me to be something of great importance which should not be
     by-passed in favour of analysis of critical vocabularies. Beauty is
     the convenient and traditional name of something which art and
     nature share, and which gives a fairly clear sense to the idea of
     quality of experience arid change of consciousness. I am looking
     out of my window in an anxious and resentful state of mind,
     oblivious of my surroundings, brooding perhaps on some damage done to my prestige. Then suddenly I observe a hovering
     kestrel. In a moment everything is altered. The brooding self
     with its hurt vanity has disappeared. There is nothing now but
     kestrel. And when I return to thinking of the other matter it
     seems less important. And of course this is something which we
     may also do deliberately: give attention to nature in order to
     clear our minds of selfish care. It may seem odd to start the
     argument against what I have roughly labelled as ‘romanticism’
     by using the case of attention to nature. In fact I do not think that
     any of the great romantics really believed that we receive but

=== p. 83 ===

what we give and in our life alone does nature live, although the
lesser ones tended to follow Kant’s lead and use nature as an
occasion for exalted self-feeling. The great romantics, including
the one I have just quoted, transcended ‘romanticism’. A self-directed enjoyment of nature seems to me to be something
forced. More naturally, as well as more properly, we take a self-forgetful pleasure in the sheer alien pointless independent existence of animals, birds, stones and trees. ‘Not how the world is,
but that it is, is the mystical.’
   I take this starting-point, not because I think it is the most
important place of moral change, but because I think it is the
most accessible one. It is so patently a good thing to take delight
in flowers and animals that people who bring home potted
plants and watch kestrels might even be surprised at the notion
that these things have anything to do with virtue. The surprise is
a product of the fact that, as Plato pointed out, beauty is the only
spiritual thing which we love by instinct. When we move from
beauty in nature to beauty in art we are already in a more difficult region. The experience of art is more easily degraded than
the experience of nature. A great deal of art, perhaps most art,
actually is self-consoling fantasy, and even great art cannot guarantee the quality of its consumer’s consciousness. However, great
art exists and is sometimes properly experienced and even a
shallow experience of what is great can have its effect. Art, and
by ‘art’ from now on I mean good art, not fantasy art, affords us
a pure delight in the independent existence of what is excellent.
Both in its genesis and its enjoyment it is a thing totally opposed
to selfish obsession. It invigorates our best faculties and, to use
Platonic language, inspires love in the highest part of the soul. It
is able to do this partly by virtue of something which it shares
with nature: a perfection of form which invites unpossessive
contemplation and resists absorption into the selfish dream life
of the consciousness.
   Art however, considered as a sacrament or a source of good

=== p. 84 ===

     energy, possesses an extra dimension. Art is less accessible than
     nature but also more edifying since it is actually a human
     product, and certain arts are actually ‘about’ human affairs in
     a direct sense. Art is a human product and virtues as well
     as talents are required of the artist. The good artist, in relation
     to his art, is brave, truthful, patient, humble; and even in
     non-representational art we may receive intuitions of these
     qualities. One may also suggest, more cautiously, that nonrepresentational art does seem to express more positively something which is to do with virtue. The spiritual role of music has
     often been acknowledged, though theorists have been chary of
     analysing it. However that may be, the representational arts,
     which more evidently hold the mirror up to nature, seem to be
     concerned with morality in a way which is not simply an effect
     of our intuition of the artist’s discipline.
        These arts, especially literature and painting, show us the
     peculiar sense in which the concept of virtue is tied on to the
     human condition. They show us the absolute pointlessness of
     virtue while exhibiting its supreme importance; the enjoyment
     of art is a training in the love of virtue. The pointlessness of art is
     not the pointlessness of a game; it is the pointlessness of human
     life itself, and form in art is properly the simulation of the self-contained aimlessness of the universe. Good art reveals what we
     are usually too selfish and too timid to recognize, the minute and
     absolutely random detail of the world, and reveals it together
     with a sense of unity and form. This form often seems to us
     mysterious because it resists the easy patterns of the fantasy,
     whereas there is nothing mysterious about the forms of bad art
     since they are the recognizable and familiar rat-runs of selfish
     day-dream. Good art shows us how difficult it is to be objective
     by showing us how differently the world looks to an objective
     vision. We are presented with a truthful image of the human
     condition in a form which can be steadily contemplated; and
     indeed this is the only context in which many of us are capable

=== p. 85 ===

of contemplating it at all. Art transcends selfish and obsessive
limitations of personality and can enlarge the sensibility of its
consumer. It is a kind of goodness by proxy. Most of all it
exhibits to us the connection, in human beings, of clear realistic
vision with compassion. The realism of a great artist is not a
photographic realism, it is essentially both pity and justice.
   Herein we find a remarkable redemption of our tendency to
conceal death and chance by the invention of forms. Any story
which we tell about ourselves consoles us since it imposes pattern upon something which might otherwise seem intolerably
chancy and incomplete. However, human life is chancy and
incomplete. It is the role of tragedy, and also of comedy, and of
painting to show us suffering without a thrill and death without
a consolation. Or if there is any consolation it is the austere
consolation of a beauty which teaches that nothing in life is of
any value except the attempt to be virtuous. Masochism is the
artist’s greatest and most subtle enemy. It is not easy to portray
death, real death, not fake prettified death. Even Tolstoy did not
really manage it in Ivan Ilyich, although he did elsewhere. The
great deaths of literature are few, but they show us with an
exemplary clarity the way in which art invigorates us by a juxtaposition, almost an identification, of pointlessness and value.
The death of Patroclus, the death of Cordelia, the death of Petya
Rostov. All is vanity. The only thing which is of real importance
is the ability to see it all clearly and respond to it justly which is
inseparable from virtue. Perhaps one of the greatest achievements of all is to join this sense of absolute mortality not to the
tragic but to the comic. Shallow and Silence. Stefan Trofimovich
Verhovensky.
   Art then is not a diversion or a side-issue, it is the most educational of all human activities and a place in which the nature of
morality can be seen. Art gives a clear sense to many ideas which
seem more puzzling when we meet with them elsewhere, and it
is a clue to what happens elsewhere. An understanding of any art

=== p. 86 ===

     involves a recognition of hierarchy and authority. There are very
     evident degrees of merit, there are heights and distances; even
     Shakespeare is not perfect. Good art, unlike bad art, unlike ‘happenings’, is something pre-eminently outside us and resistant to
     our consciousness. We surrender ourselves to its authority with a
     love which is unpossessive and unselfish. Art shows us the only
     sense in which the permanent and incorruptible is compatible
     with the transient; and whether representational or not it reveals
     to us aspects of our world which our ordinary dull dream-consciousness is unable to see. Art pierces the veil and gives
     sense to the notion of a reality which lies beyond appearance;
     it exhibits virtue in its true guise in the context of death and
     chance.
        Plato held that beauty could be a starting-point of the good
     life, but he came to mistrust art and we can see played out in that
     great spirit the peculiarly distressing struggle between the artist
     and the saint. Plato allowed to the beauty of the lovely boy an
     awakening power which he denied to the beauty of nature or of
     art. He seems to have come to believe that all art is bad art, a
     mere fiction and consolation which distorts reality. About nature
     he seems, in the context of the theory of forms, to have been at
     least once in doubt. Are there forms of mud, hair and dirt? If
     there are then nature is redeemed into the area of truthful vision.
     (My previous argument assumes of course, in Platonic terms,
     that there are.) Another starting-point, or road, which Plato
     speaks of more often however is the way of the τχναι, the sciences, crafts, and intellectual disciplines excluding the arts. I
     think there is a way of the intellect, a sense in which intellectual
     disciplines are moral disciplines, and this is not too difficult to
     discern. There are important bridge ideas between morality and
     other at first sight different human activities, and these ideas are
     perhaps most clearly seen in the context of the τχναι. And as
     when we use the nature of art as a clue, we may be able to learn
     more about the central area of morality if we examine what are

=== p. 87 ===

essentially the same concepts more simply on display elsewhere.
I mean such concepts as justice, accuracy, truthfulness, realism,
humility, courage as the ability to sustain clear vision, love as
attachment or even passion without sentiment or self.
   The τχνη which Plato thought was most important was
mathematics, because it was most rigorous and abstract. I shall
take an example of a τχνη more congenial to myself: learning a
language. If I am learning, for instance, Russian, I am confronted
by an authoritative structure which commands my respect. The
task is difficult and the goal is distant and perhaps never entirely
attainable. My work is a progressive revelation of something
which exists independently of me. Attention is rewarded by a
knowledge of reality. Love of Russian leads me away from myself
towards something alien to me, something which my consciousness cannot take over, swallow up, deny or make unreal.
The honesty and humility required of the student—not to pretend to know what one does not know—is the preparation for
the honesty and humility of the scholar who does not even feel
tempted to suppress the fact which damns his theory. Of course
a τχνη can be misused; a scientist might feel he ought to give up
a certain branch of study if he knew that his discoveries would
be used wickedly. But apart from special contexts, studying is
normally an exercise of virtue as well as of talent, and shows us a
fundamental way in which virtue is related to the real world.
   I suggested that we could see most clearly in the case of the
τχναι the nature of concepts very central to morality such as
justice, truthfulness or humility. We can see too the growth and
the inter-connection of these concepts, as when what looks like
mere accuracy at one end looks more like justice or courage, or
even love at the other. Developing a Sprachgefühl is developing a
judicious respectful sensibility to something which is very like
another organism. An intellectual discipline can play the same
kind of role as that which I have attributed to art, it can
stretch the imagination, enlarge the vision and strengthen the

=== p. 88 ===

     judgment. When Plato made mathematics the king τχνη he was
     regarding mathematical thought as leading the mind away from
     the material world and enabling it to perceive a reality of a new
     kind, very unlike ordinary appearances. And one might regard
     other disciplines, history, philology, chemistry, as presenting us
     with a new kind of subject-matter and showing us a new reality
     behind appearance. These studies are not only an exercise in
     virtue, they might be thought of as introductory images of the
     spiritual life. But they are not the spiritual life itself and the mind
     which has ascended no farther has not achieved the whole of
     virtue.
        I want now to make a closer approach to the central subject of
     my argument, the Good. Beauty and the τχναι are, to use Plato’s
     image, the text written in large letters. The concept Good itself is
     the much harder to discern but essentially similar text written in
     small letters. In intellectual disciplines and in the enjoyment of
     art and nature we discover value in our ability to forget self, to be
     realistic, to perceive justly. We use our imagination not to escape
     the world but to join it, and this exhilarates us because of the
     distance between our ordinary dulled consciousness and an
     apprehension of the real. The value concepts are here patently
     tied on to the world, they are stretched as it were between the
     truth-seeking mind and the world, they are not moving about on
     their own as adjuncts of the personal will. The authority of
     morals is the authority of truth, that is of reality. We can see the
     length, the extension, of these concepts as patient attention
     transforms accuracy without interval into just discernment. Here
     too we can see it as natural to the particular kind of creatures that
     we are that love should be inseparable from justice, and clear
     vision from respect for the real.
        That virtue operates in exactly the same kind of way in the
     central area of morality is less easy to perceive. Human beings
     are far more complicated and enigmatic and ambiguous than
     languages or mathematical concepts, and selfishness operates in

=== p. 89 ===

a much more devious and frenzied manner in our relations with
them. Ignorance, muddle, fear, wishful thinking, lack of tests
often make us feel that moral choice is something arbitrary, a
matter for personal will rather than for attentive study. Our
attachments tend to be selfish and strong, and the transformation
of our loves from selfishness to unselfishness is sometimes hard
even to conceive of. Yet is the situation really so different? Should
a retarded child be kept at home or sent to an institution? Should
an elderly relation who is a trouble-maker be cared for or asked
to go away? Should an unhappy marriage be continued for the
sake of the children? Should I leave my family in order to do
political work? Should I neglect them in order to practise my art?
The love which brings the right answer is an exercise of justice
and realism and really looking. The difficulty is to keep the attention fixed upon the real situation and to prevent it from returning surreptitiously to the self with consolations of self-pity,
resentment, fantasy and despair. The refusal to attend may even
induce a fictitious sense of freedom: I may as well toss a coin. Of
course virtue is good habit and dutiful action. But the background condition of such habit and such action, in human
beings, is a just mode of vision and a good quality of consciousness. It is a task to come to see the world as it is. A philosophy
which leaves duty without a context and exalts the idea of freedom and power as a separate top level value ignores this task and
obscures the relation between virtue and reality. We act rightly
‘when the time comes’ not out of strength of will but out of the
quality of our usual attachments and with the kind of energy and
discernment which we have available. And to this the whole
activity of our consciousness is relevant.
   The central explanatory image which joins together the different aspects of the picture which I have been trying to exhibit
is the concept of Good. It is a concept which is not easy to
understand partly because it has so many false doubles, jumped-up intermediaries invented by human selfishness to make the

=== p. 90 ===

     difficult task of virtue look easier and more attractive: History,
     God, Lucifer, Ideas of power, freedom, purpose, reward, even
     judgment are irrelevant. Mystics of all kinds have usually known
     this and have attempted by extremities of language to portray the
     nakedness and aloneness of Good, its absolute for-nothingness.
     One might say that true morality is a sort of unesoteric mysticism, having its source in an austere and unconsoled love of the
     Good. When Plato wants to explain Good he uses the image of
     the sun. The moral pilgrim emerges from the cave and begins to
     see the real world in the light of the sun, and last of all is able
     to look at the sun itself. I want now to comment on various
     aspects of this extremely rich metaphor.
        The sun is seen at the end of a long quest which involves a
     reorientation (the prisoners have to turn round) and an ascent. It
     is real, it is out there, but very distant. It gives light and energy
     and enables us to know truth. In its light we see the things of the
     world in their true relationships. Looking at it itself is supremely
     difficult and is unlike looking at things in its light. It is a different
     kind of thing from what it illuminates. Note the metaphor of
     ‘thing’ here. Good is a concept about which, and not only in
     philosophical language, we naturally use a Platonic terminology,
     when we speak about seeking the Good, or loving the Good. We
     may also speak seriously of ordinary things, people, works of art,
     as being good, although we are also well aware of their imperfections. Good lives as it were on both sides of the barrier and we
     can combine the aspiration to complete goodness with a realistic
     sense of achievement within our limitations. For all our frailty
     the command ‘be perfect’ has sense for us. The concept Good
     resists collapse into the selfish empirical consciousness. It is not a
     mere value tag of the choosing will, and functional and casual
     uses of ‘good’ (a good knife, a good fellow) are not, as some
     philosophers have wished to argue, clues to the structure of the
     concept. The proper and serious use of the term refers us to a
     perfection which is perhaps never exemplified in the world we

=== p. 91 ===

know (‘There is no good in us’) and which carries with it the
ideas of hierarchy and transcendence. How do we know that the
very great are not the perfect? We see differences, we sense directions, and we know that the Good is still somewhere beyond.
The self, the place where we live, is a place of illusion. Goodness
is connected with the attempt to see the unself, to see and to
respond to the real world in the light of a virtuous consciousness. This is the non-metaphysical meaning of the idea of transcendence to which philosophers have so constantly resorted in
their explanations of goodness. ‘Good is a transcendent reality’
means that virtue is the attempt to pierce the veil of selfish
consciousness and join the world as it really is. It is an empirical
fact about human nature that this attempt cannot be entirely
successful.
   Of course we are dealing with a metaphor, but with a very
important metaphor and one which is not just a property of
philosophy and not just a model. As I said at the beginning, we
are creatures who use irreplaceable metaphors in many of our
most important activities. And the decent man has probably
always, if uncertainly and inexplicably, been able to distinguish
between the real Good and its false double. In most ideological
contexts virtue can be loved for its own sake. The fundamental
metaphors as it were carry this love through and beyond what is
false. Metaphors can be a mode of understanding, and so of
acting upon, our condition. Philosophers merely do explicitly
and systematically and often with art what the ordinary person
does by instinct. Plato, who understood this situation better than
most of the metaphysical philosophers, referred to many of his
theories as ‘myths’, and tells us that the Republic is to be thought
of as an allegory of the soul. ‘Perhaps it is a pattern laid up in
heaven where he who wishes can see it and become its citizen.
But it doesn’t matter whether it exists or ever will exist; it
is the only city in whose politics [the good man] can take part’
(Republic 592).

=== p. 92 ===

        I want now to continue to explain the concept of the Good
     and its peculiar relation to other concepts by speaking first of the
     unifying power of this idea, and secondly of its indefinability. I
     said earlier that as far as I could see there was no metaphysical
     unity in human life: all was subject to mortality and chance. And
     yet we continue to dream of unity. Art is our most ardent dream.
     In fact morality does actually display to us a sort of unity, though
     of a peculiar kind and quite unlike the closed theoretical unity of
     the ideologies. Plato pictures the journeying soul as ascending
     through four stages of enlightenment, progressively discovering
     at each stage that what it was treating as realities were only
     shadows or images of something more real still. At the end of its
     quest it reaches a non-hypothetical first principle which is the
     form or idea of the Good, which enables it then to descend and
     retrace its path, but moving only through the forms or true
     conception of that which it previously understood only in part
     (Republic 510–11). This passage in the Republic has aroused a great
     deal of discussion but it seems to me that its general application
     to morality is fairly clear. The mind which has ascended to the
     vision of the Good can subsequently see the concepts through
     which it has ascended (art, work, nature, people, ideas, institutions, situations, etc., etc.) in their true nature and in their
     proper relationships to each other. The good man knows
     whether and when art or politics is more important than family.
     The good man sees the way in which the virtues are related to
     each other. Plato never in fact anywhere expounds a systematic
     and unitary view of the world of the forms, though he implies
     that there is a hierarchy of forms. (Truth and Knowledge, for
     instance, come fairly closely underneath Good, Republic 509a).
     What he does suggest is that we work with the idea of such a
     hierarchy in so far as we introduce order into our conceptions of
     the world through our apprehension of Good.
        This seems to me to be true. Plato’s image implies that complete unity is not seen until one has reached the summit, but

=== p. 93 ===

moral advance carries with it intuitions of unity which are
increasingly less misleading. As we deepen our notions of the
virtues we introduce relationship and hierarchy. Courage, which
seemed at first to be something on its own, a sort of specialized
daring of the spirit, is now seen to be a particular operation of
wisdom and love. We come to distinguish a self-assertive ferocity from the kind of courage which would enable a man coolly
to choose the labour camp rather than the easy compromise
with the tyrant. It would be impossible to have only one virtue
unless it were a very trivial one such as thrift. Such transformations as these are cases of seeing the order of the world in the
light of the Good and revisiting the true, or more true, conceptions of that which we formerly misconceived. Freedom, we find
out, is not an inconsequential chucking of one’s weight about, it
is the disciplined overcoming of self. Humility is not a peculiar
habit of self-effacement, rather like having an inaudible voice, it
is selfless respect for reality and one of the most difficult and
central of all virtues.
   Because of his ambiguous attitude to the sensible world, of
which I have already spoken, and because of his confidence in
the revolutionary power of mathematics, Plato sometimes seems
to imply that the road towards the Good leads away from the
world of particularity and detail. However, he speaks of a descending as well as an ascending dialectic and he speaks of a
return to the cave. In any case, in so far as goodness is for use in
politics and in the market place it must combine its increasing
intuitions of unity with an increasing grasp of complexity and
detail. False conceptions are often generalized, stereotyped and
unconnected. True conceptions combine just modes of judgment and ability to connect with an increased perception of
detail. The case of the mother who has to consider each one of
her family carefully as she decides whether or not to throw
auntie out. This double revelation of both random detail and
intuited unity is what we receive in every sphere of life if we

=== p. 94 ===

     seek for what is best. We can see this, once more, quite clearly in
     art and intellectual work. The great artists reveal the detail of the
     world. At the same time their greatness is not something peculiar and personal like a proper name. They are great in ways
     which are to some extent similar, and increased understanding
     of an art reveals its unity through its excellence. All serious criticism assumes this, though it might be wary of expressing it in a
     theoretical manner. Art reveals reality and because there is a way
     in which things are there is a fellowship of artists. Similarly with
     scholars. Honesty seems much the same virtue in a chemist as in
     a historian and the evolution of the two could be similar. And
     there is another similarity between the honesty required to tear
     up one’s theory and the honesty required to perceive the real
     state of one’s marriage, though doubtless the latter is much
     more difficult. Plato, who is sometimes accused of over-valuing
     intellectual disciplines, is quite explicit in giving these, when
     considered on their own, a high but second place. A serious
     scholar has great merits. But a serious scholar who is also a good
     man knows not only his subject but the proper place of his
     subject in the whole of his life. The understanding which leads
     the scientist to the right decision about giving up a certain study,
     or leads the artist to the right decision about his family, is
     superior to the understanding
                            
                                       of art and
                                                
                                                  science as such. (Is this
     not what κατοι νοητων ντων μετὰ αρχη  means? Republic 511d.)
     We are admittedly specialized creatures where morality is concerned and merit in one area does not seem to guarantee merit
     in another. The good artist is not necessarily wise at home, and
     the concentration camp guard can be a kindly father. At least this
     can seem to be so, though I would feel that the artist had at least
     got a starting-point and that on closer inspection the concentration camp guard might prove to have his limitations as a family
     man. The scene remains disparate and complex beyond the
     hopes of any system, yet at the same time the concept Good
     stretches through the whole of it and gives it the only kind of

=== p. 95 ===

shadowy unachieved unity which it can possess. The area of
morals, and ergo of moral philosophy, can now be seen, not as a
hole-and-corner matter of debts and promises, but as covering
the whole of our mode of living and the quality of our relations
with the world.
   Good has often been said to be indefinable for reasons connected with freedom. Good is an empty space into which
human choice may move. I want now to suggest that the indefinability of the good should be conceived of rather differently.
On the kind of view which I have been offering it seems that we
do really know a certain amount about Good and about the way
in which it is connected with our condition. The ordinary person does not, unless corrupted by philosophy, believe that he
creates values by his choices. He thinks that some things really
are better than others and that he is capable of getting it wrong.
We are not usually in doubt about the direction in which Good
lies. Equally we recognize the real existence of evil: cynicism,
cruelty, indifference to suffering. However, the concept of Good
still remains obscure and mysterious. We see the world in the
light of the Good, but what is the Good itself? The source of
vision is not in the ordinary sense seen. Plato says of it ‘It is that
which every soul pursues and for the sake of which it does
all that it does, with some intuition of its nature, and yet also
baffled’ (Republic 505). And he also says that Good is the source
of knowledge and truth and yet is something which surpasses
them in splendour (Republic 508–9).
   There is a sort of logical, in the modern sense of the word,
answer to the question but I think it is not the whole answer.
Asking what Good is is not like asking what Truth is or what
Courage is, since in explaining the latter the idea of Good must
enter in, it is that in the light of which the explanation must
proceed. ‘True courage is . . . ’. And if we try to define Good as X
we have to add that we mean of course a good X. If we say that
Good is Reason we have to talk about good judgment. If we say

=== p. 96 ===

     that Good is Love we have to explain that there are different
     kinds of love. Even the concept of Truth has it ambiguities and it
     is really only of Good that we can say ‘it is the trial of itself and
     needs no other touch’. And with this I agree. It is also argued that
     all things which are capable of showing degrees of excellence
     show it in their own way. The idea of perfection can only be
     exemplified in particular cases in terms of the kind of perfection
     which is appropriate. So one could not say in general what perfection is, in the way in which one could talk about generosity
     or good painting. In any case, opinions differ and the truth of
     judgments of value cannot be demonstrated. This line of argument is sometimes used to support a view of Good as empty and
     almost trivial, a mere word, ‘the most general adjective of commendation’, a flag used by the questing will, a term which could
     with greater clarity be replaced by ‘I’m for this.’ This argument
     and its conclusion seem to me to be wrong for reasons which I
     have already given: excellence has a kind of unity and there are
     facts about our condition from which lines converge in a definite
     direction; and also for other reasons which I will now suggest.
        A genuine mysteriousness attaches to the idea of goodness
     and the Good. This is a mystery with several aspects. The indefinability of Good is connected with the unsystematic and
     inexhaustible variety of the world and the pointlessness of virtue. In this respect there is a special link between the concept of
     Good and the ideas of Death and Chance. (One might say that
     Chance is really a subdivision of Death. It is certainly our most
     effective memento mori.) A genuine sense of mortality enables us to
     see virtue as the only thing of worth; and it is impossible to limit
     and foresee the ways in which it will be required of us. That we
     cannot dominate the world may be put in a more positive way.
     Good is mysterious because of human frailty, because of the
     immense distance which is involved. If there were angels they
     might be able to define good but we would not understand the
     definition. We are largely mechanical creatures, the slaves of

=== p. 97 ===

relentlessly strong selfish forces the nature of which we scarcely
comprehend. At best, as decent persons, we are usually very
specialized. We behave well in areas where this can be done fairly
easily and let other areas of possible virtue remain undeveloped.
There are perhaps in the case of every human being insuperable
psychological barriers to goodness. The self is a divided thing
and the whole of it cannot be redeemed any more than it can
be known. And if we look outside the self what we see are
scattered intimations of Good. There are few places where virtue plainly shines: great art, humble people who serve others.
And can we, without improving ourselves, really see these
things clearly? It is in the context of such limitations that we
should picture our freedom. Freedom is, I think, a mixed concept. The true half of it is simply a name of an aspect of virtue
concerned especially with the clarification of vision and the
domination of selfish impulse. The false and more popular half
is a name for the self-assertive movements of deluded selfish
will which because of our ignorance we take to be something
autonomous.
   We cannot then sum up human excellence for these reasons:
the world is aimless, chancy, and huge, and we are blinded by
self. There is a third consideration which is a relation of the
other two. It is difficult to look at the sun: it is not like looking at
other things. We somehow retain the idea, and art both
expresses and symbolizes it, that the lines really do converge.
There is a magnetic centre. But it is easier to look at the converging edges than to look at the centre itself. We do not and
probably cannot know, conceptualize, what it is like in the
centre. It may be said that since we cannot see anything there
why try to look? And is there not a danger of damaging our
ability to focus on the sides? I think there is a sense in trying to
look, though the occupation is perilous for reasons connected
with masochism and other obscure devices of the psyche. The
impulse to worship is deep and ambiguous and old. There are

=== p. 98 ===

     false suns, easier to gaze upon and far more comforting than the
     true one.
        Plato has given us the image of this deluded worship in his
     great allegory. The prisoners in the cave at first face the back
     wall. Behind them a fire is burning in the light of which they see
     upon the wall the shadows of puppets which are carried
     between them and the fire and they take these shadows to be the
     whole of reality. When they turn round they can see the fire,
     which they have to pass in order to get out of the cave. The fire, I
     take it, represents the self, the old unregenerate psyche, that great
     source of energy and warmth. The prisoners in the second stage
     of enlightenment have gained the kind of self-awareness which
     is nowadays a matter of so much interest to us. They can see in
     themselves the sources of what was formerly blind selfish
     instinct. They see the flames which threw the shadows which
     they used to think were real, and they can see the puppets,
     imitations of things in the real world, whose shadows they used
     to recognize. They do not yet dream that there is anything else to
     see. What is more likely than that they should settle down beside
     the fire, which though its form is flickering and unclear is quite
     easy to look at and cosy to sit by?
        I think Kant was afraid of this when he went to such lengths
     to draw our attention away from the empirical psyche. This
     powerful thing is indeed an object of fascination, and those who
     study its power to cast shadows are studying something which is
     real. A recognition of its power may be a step towards escape
     from the cave; but it may equally be taken as an end-point. The
     fire may be mistaken for the sun, and self-scrutiny taken for
     goodness. (Of course not everyone who escapes from the cave
     need have spent much time by the fire. Perhaps the virtuous
     peasant has got out of the cave without even noticing the fire.)
     Any religion or ideology can be degraded by the substitution of
     self, usually in some disguise, for the true object of veneration.
     However, in spite of what Kant was so much afraid of I think

=== p. 99 ===

there is a place both inside and outside religion for a sort of
contemplation of the Good, not just by dedicated experts but by
ordinary people: an attention which is not just the planning of
particular good actions but an attempt to look right away from
self towards a distant transcendent perfection, a source of
uncontaminated energy, a source of new and quite undreamt-of
virtue. This attempt, which is a turning of attention away from
the particular, may be the thing that helps most when difficulties
seem insoluble, and especially when feelings of guilt keep attracting the gaze back towards the self. This is the true mysticism
which is morality, a kind of undogmatic prayer which is real and
important, though perhaps also difficult and easily corrupted.
   I have been speaking of the indefinability of the Good; but is
there really nothing else that we can say about it? Even if we
cannot find it another name, even if it must be thought of as
above and alone, are there not other concepts, or another concept, with which it has some quite special relation? Philosophers
have often tried to discern such a relationship: Freedom, Reason,
Happiness, Courage, History have recently been tried in the role.
I do not find any of these candidates convincing. They seem to
represent in each case the philosopher’s admiration for some
specialized aspect of human conduct which is much less than
the whole of excellence and sometimes dubious in itself. I have
already mentioned a concept with a certain claim and I will
return to that in conclusion. I want now to speak of what is
perhaps the most obvious as well as the most ancient and traditional claimant, though one which is rarely mentioned by our
contemporary philosophers, and that is Love. Of course Good is
sovereign over Love, as it is sovereign over other concepts,
because Love can name something bad. But is there not nevertheless something about the conception of a refined love which
is practically identical with goodness? Will not ‘Act lovingly’
translate ‘Act perfectly’, whereas ‘Act rationally’ will not? It is
tempting to say so.

=== p. 100 ===

        However I think that Good and Love should not be identified,
    and not only because human love is usually self-assertive. The
    concepts, even when the idea of love is purified, still play different roles. We are dealing here with very difficult metaphors.
    Good is the magnetic centre towards which love naturally moves.
    False love moves to false good. False love embraces false death.
    When true good is loved, even impurely or by accident, the
    quality of the love is automatically refined, and when the soul is
    turned towards Good the highest part of the soul is enlivened.
    Love is the tension between the imperfect soul and the magnetic
    perfection which is conceived of as lying beyond it. (In the
    Symposium Plato pictures Love as being poor and needy.) And
    when we try perfectly to love what is imperfect our love goes to
    its object via the Good to be thus purified and made unselfish and
    just. The mother loving the retarded child or loving the tiresome
    elderly relation. Love is the general name of the quality of
    attachment and it is capable of infinite degradation and is the
    source of our greatest errors; but when it is even partially refined
    it is the energy and passion of the soul in its search for Good, the
    force that joins us to Good and joins us to the world through
    Good. Its existence is the unmistakable sign that we are spiritual
    creatures, attracted by excellence and made for the Good. It is a
    reflection of the warmth and light of the sun.
        Perhaps the finding of other names for Good or the establishing of special relationships cannot be more than a sort of personal game. However I want in conclusion to make just one
    more move. Goodness is connected with the acceptance of real
    death and real chance and real transience and only against the
    background of this acceptance, which is psychologically so difficult, can we understand the full extent of what virtue is like.
    The acceptance of death is an acceptance of our own nothingness which is an automatic spur to our concern with what is not
    ourselves. The good man is humble; he is very unlike the big
    neo-Kantian Lucifer. He is much more like Kierkegaard’s tax

=== p. 101 ===

collector. Humility is a rare virtue and an unfashionable one and
one which is often hard to discern. Only rarely does one meet
somebody in whom it positively shines, in whom one apprehends with amazement the absence of the anxious avaricious
tentacles of the self. In fact any other name for Good must be a
partial name; but names of virtues suggest directions of thought,
and this direction seems to me a better one than that suggested
by more popular concepts such as freedom and courage. The
humble man, because he sees himself as nothing, can see other
things as they are. He sees the pointlessness of virtue and its
unique value and the endless extent of its demand. Simone Weil
tells us that the exposure of the soul to God condemns the selfish
part of it not to suffering but to death. The humble man perceives the distance between suffering and death. And although
he is not by definition the good man perhaps he is the kind of
man who is most likely of all to become good.

